The Theory of 1,000 FansThe Internet as an EqualizerTen years ago if you were an artist and wanted to sell your music all over the world you needed to be signed to a major label, and be partnered with a major distributor.Today all you need to do to sell your music all over the world is to signup for a Bandcamp account. You don’t need a label, you don’t need a distributor (in the traditional definition because Bandcamp is a ‘digital distributor’) you don’t need to pay for anything up front.The problem that comes with it being so easy to distribute music online is that your potential fans have a lot of other choices. But here’s the secret to the whole success thing…You don’t need everyone as a fanThis sounds counterintuitive, or possibly dismissive, but it’s absolutely true. If you are a metal band, you don’t need to win over fans of country music.Find your niche, and help your niche find you.By the numbersFor the sake of ease in this example I am going to use 1,000 fans as a base, but really this model is scalable depending on the income you need, the number of members in your band, and how much your fans spend on you/your music every year.If you have 1,000 dedicated fans who spend an average of $100 a year, your income is $100,000. If you are a solo musician this is a pretty nice income, right?So why 1,000 fans? Because this is absolutely achievable. If you are diligent, play live shows, and release music regularly you can build up to 1,000 fans. There are over 7 Billion people in the world, you can absolutely find 1,000 people who enjoy your music!Why $100 dollars? Because this is absolutely achievable. (Do I sound like I’m repeating myself?).If you play live shows and charge $10/ticket (assuming you keep 100% of door) you only need your fans to attend 10 performances a year.If you sell T-shirts for $15 of profit you only need to sell 7 (6.6666) shirts per fan.If you sell digital downloads for $9.99 you need to sell 10 per fan.It sounds a little ridiculous but if you use a mixture of all of these things, ie. release one album per year, and sell two new shirts per year, you only need to play six shows. Obviously you will be playing way more than six shows in a year.Using the internet to helpThere are no shortage of direct-to-fan platforms like Patreon, Pledgemusic, and even Bandcamp has recently launched thier own. A direct to fan platform is similar to crowdfunding in that fans pledge a certain amount of money either on a monthly, yearly, or one time basis (depending on the platform).I’ll be talking about using Patreon just because they offer an ongoing way to fan-fund. If you can get your 1,000 fans to contribute $8.34/month via Patreon, you can achieve your goal of $100 per fan.So what can you do to get your fans to contribute via Patreon? Give them all of your music digitally. Give them exclusive music, or timed exclusive music. Give them access to exclusive online concerts via Google Hangouts. Offer to send them handwritten letters every month.If your fans like you, it shouldn’t be hard to come up with enough value to make it worth subscribing. This means that anything you make outside of these platforms is extra.Getting startedSo what do you do if you don’t have 1,000 fans? Start with what you do have. Continue to nurture the relationships you have with your fans, play more shows, continue releasing music, be authentic, make friends with other local artists and help each other, tour to new markets.The great thing about fans is they often want to share your music with others, which makes your growth exponential.ConclusionYou can make it in the music industry, and it’s easier than you thought. You don’t need a major label, a major distributor, or a 1,000,000 fans. Using a combination of online distribution, direct to fan platforms, live shows, and merchandise you can make a sustainable living from as little as 1,000 fans spending $100/year. You can also use these platforms, and methods to build yourself up to a point of sustainability.