An Open Letter to Minnesota ArtistsWe, Christina Schmid and Megan Vossler, are a current and a former panelist for the Minnesota Artists Exhibition Program (MAEP) at the Minneapolis Institute of Art (now known as Mia). We are writing this letter to share information about several pending changes to the MAEP. These changes were first communicated to the current MAEP panel at a meeting in May 2015. Christopher Atkins, the outgoing Program Coordinator, also generously answered questions about the future of the program via email and phone throughout the summer. But what’s been missing has been a clear statement to the artist community about the scope of the changes, the reasons for these changes, and their possible effects on the program. We hope to address this gap in our letter and add a few of our own questions and speculations.So, what’s changing?First, as of summer 2016, the MAEP will move from its current two galleries in Mia’s Target Wing into one gallery, the US Bank Gallery, in the main part of the museum. This move is not unprecedented. In its 40-year history, the program has occupied a number of different spaces in the museum. The imminent move is motivated by the Institute’s desire to use the Target Wing as a cohesive space for exhibitions like “The Nature of Nature” and “Sacred.” Exhibitions like these are relatively new to Mia, and were initiated by their first curator of contemporary art, Liz Armstrong (who has recently left the Institute). When the Target Wing opened in 2006, these exhibitions were still being developed. Now that there is a track record for such shows (which have included a number of artists working in Minnesota today) the need for a more suitable, unified space has prompted the Institute to consider the Target Wing as a future location for such multi-gallery exhibitions.In a section of the MAEP website dated May 26, 2015, the new location for future exhibitions is stated in a FAQ document that can be accessed via download. A map of the US Bank Gallery can also be found there. (http://maep.mnartists.org/)The move to the US Bank Gallery, according to the talking points provided to MAEP panelists in May, promises more foot traffic and easier inclusion in Third Thursday events, due to its more central location. The biggest challenges of the space are its layout — a small antechamber adjacent to a 71-foot long, narrow, high-ceilinged gallery — and the single modest entry. (At the most recent panel meeting, Matthew Welch, Deputy Director and Chief Curator, informed us that there are plans for renovating the gallery: making the entry more prominent and changing the back wall’s narrow door, marked “exit.” These changes have been written into the budget and are pending approval. So while the need for improved access has been recognized, there seems to be no definitive timeline in place yet.)In addition to the relocation within the Institute, but not stated explicitly in any public document, is another pending change to the program: the number of shows per year will drop, beginning in summer 2016, down to three per year. Currently, the program presents exhibitions in four annual time slots. It is important to note that each of these time slots has almost always included (with a few exceptions for large solo shows) two separate exhibitions showing a total of at least two artists: one artist per gallery. On many occasions, two- or three-person shows have been mounted in a single gallery, raising the total number of artists exhibited per time slot to four or or more. However, according to Atkins, the particularities of the US Bank Gallery will necessitate that future MAEP shows will primarily present the work of a single artist (with possible exceptions if an artist collaborative applies together). In other words, there will be no more “pairing” of shows: the panel will be selecting a single exhibition proposal for each of the (now reduced to three) annual time slots.According to Welch, the Institute’s position is that the only cut to the program is the reduction of time slots, and that reducing from four per year down to three amounts to a cut of 25%. However, given that each time slot previously supported a minimum of two artists (often many more), the math can also be done differently. Taking away one of four annual time slots does certainly reduce the number of exhibitions by 25%. But combine that with the move to a single gallery space, truly a “one artist per show” model, and that leaves the number of artists who can participate in the program reduced by a minimum of 63%: a much more significant and sobering cut. [This number reflects the difference between the annual number of artists who currently exhibit in the program (8 or more) and the number who will exhibit under the new program structure (3).]A bit of historical context for these numbers: from the the program’s founding in 1975, until the Target Wing opened in 2006, the MAEP presented between four and seven exhibitions per year, ranging from solo shows to very large group shows, and the location of the galleries varied. From 2006 to 2010, the schedule was regularized, with five time slots per year for each of the two designated MAEP galleries. In 2010, programming was reduced to four time slots per year, still encompassing two galleries and almost always showing the work of two or more artists. (Exhibitions from mid-2009 through 2014 can be found here: http://new.artsmia.org/exhibitions/maep/past/ and earlier exhibitions are listed on a now-archived version of the Institute’s website: http://archive.artsmia.org/maep/wiki/)The Institute states that this reduction to the schedule is to align the program better with the rotation of shows in the rest of the museum. As the Institute’s exhibition schedule has continued to change, moving away from longer shows of selections from the permanent collection to more dynamic exhibitions, the MAEP’s schedule has become more difficult to accommodate. While most shows at the Institute have had a window of 4–6 weeks for de-installation and new installation, the MAEP has had only a two week window. In order to address this strain on installation crews, who basically have to drop everything else once an MAEP show closes to get the next one up and running, the reduction was deemed necessary.Both Matthew Welch and Christopher Atkins assured us that the funding for the MAEP remains unchanged. That, according to Atkins, will mean that the total sum of money for honoraria, previously divided between 8 (or more) artists per year, will now be divided among 3. In addition, there will continue to be funds for materials available. As a result, the program will become much more competitive, and offer greater financial rewards as well as longer exhibition time for the selected artists.Throughout all of these changes, Mia maintains that it continues to support the MAEP. Additionally, they state that more frequent, themed exhibitions like “Sacred” or “The Nature of Nature” are offering new opportunities for Minnesota artists, and that many Minnesota artists are being invited to work on special projects, including commissions, and events such as Third Thursday.But there is a key difference between those opportunities and the MAEP: themed exhibitions are curated under the traditional model, in which the curator reaches out to known artists to extend an invitation. The same is usually the case for commissions and special projects. Special events such as Third Thursday also privilege a certain type of artwork, and tend toward the familiar and crowd-pleasing — and are also, presumably, selected by curators or public events coordinators. This is the opposite of the model of representative democracy the MAEP has championed for 40 years, with its open calls generating a massive quantity of submissions from established and unknown artists alike, and with a panel of elected artists making the selections.Seen from an artist’s perspective, it’s hard not to fixate on that 63% reduction in participating artists, especially in the context of a larger trend toward the shuttering of exhibition opportunities (the demise of Franklin Art Works, the cancellation of exhibitions for Visual Arts McKnight fellows in favor of publications, the ending of the McKnight Photography Fellowship and its accompanying exhibitions, to name a few).The “open call” model has always been rare, and there are a few local galleries who remain strongly committed to it. It is practically unheard of for a major museum to use an open call for any of its programming. The traditional curatorial top-down approach of inviting artists to exhibit, or to create a special project, is a much more insular one, and one that by its nature will favor more established and better-connected artists. MAEP has provided an alternative to this, and the impact of the program’s open call is doubled by the fact that the “curators” who select the shows are artists themselves, elected by peers on a rotating schedule.The task of the panelists will become a lot more difficult when they only have three proposals to select each year. And, knowing those odds, many artists — especially younger, untested, emerging ones — may choose not to bother applying at all. For many emerging artists in the past, an MAEP show was our first experience with professional museum installation, exhibition documentation, printed brochures, and beautifully organized public programming for large audiences. These experiences were formative for many of our careers. Much of what has made the MAEP so important for emerging artists will become a thing of the past as the program becomes tighter and more exclusive.The lack of transparency and communication surrounding these changes remains a mystery to us. Why was there no press release, no public announcement to the community about the changes? The program, described as an “ongoing relationship between the Minnesota artist community and the MIA” on the Institute’s website, is unique in its structure — imperfect, like all representative democracies, but well-intentioned. A collaborative approach has defined the program throughout its 40 year history. Institutions have every right to shift priorities and change directions. But making sweeping changes behind the scenes to a program that prides itself on being a collaboration — changes which will dramatically impact the other half of that collaborative team — unnecessarily alienates the program’s constituents.If artists still have a stake in the program, why not communicate with us more openly? This “if” is important. The dwindling numbers at recent MAEP annual meetings (this year’s is scheduled for November 14) paint a pretty dismal picture, suggesting that the community has grown tired of the MAEP. However, the strong reactions on social media to fragmented news of the program’s relocation suggest otherwise. If the community wants a strong MAEP, the best way to let the institution know is by showing up and participating in the program: attending openings, artist talks, and, yes, (perhaps most importantly) the annual meeting.The Institute’s support for the program has sometimes been taken for granted. Does a community that does not visibly support the program deserve the support of the institution? What is clear is that this program is not an entitlement. It exists because 40 years ago, a group of artists took the initiative, negotiated, found open ears, and collaborated with the Institute. If artists disengage, why should the institution continue its support? The program’s strength, according to the website statement, “lies in the participation of the artist community and the continued support of the MIA.” In other words, participation and support — and by extension, respect — exist on a two-way street.The uncertainty that has stemmed from the Institute’s lack of transparency has led to some speculation in terms of the future of the program. At the most recent meeting, Welch assured the panel that there will be a job search for a new MAEP coordinator, hopefully sometime this fall. First, Mia has to hire a new curator of contemporary art, who in turn will oversee the hiring process for a new program coordinator.What remains to be seen is how these changes will impact the turnout at this year’s annual meeting (again: November 14). This is the one opportunity that the artist community has to make individual and collective voices heard, and to make it clear that we are not taking this collaboration for granted. The MAEP turned forty this year: a fact that seems to have eluded those responsible for the Institute’s 100th birthday celebrations and #bdaymia posts. No one will champion this program more than artists will. We, the artist community, may not have the power to change institutional direction: but we can show our strength in numbers, helping to ensure that this unique and valuable program enters its fifth decade not with a whimper, but with a bang.Sincerely,Megan Vossler and Christina SchmidSeptember 1, 2015