The Single Most Important Quality of Successful Artists (Hint: It’s Not Talent)The first question I usually ask my students and the artists I coach is this:“If I could guarantee that you would never find commercial success in your craft for the next ten years, would you still want to be an artist?”If the answer is “Yes,” then I continue/start working with them. If they answer “No,” I recommend other resources for them.The reason this is my intake “test,” per say, is because the single most important metric I have in determining whether or not an artist can benefit from my coaching is their love of their craft. I understand that this might seem harsh, or like a fucked up question to ask, but the way you answer that question really says a lot about who you are and how serious you’re willing to be.You see, success as an artist is much like a volcanic island — it’s built upon years and years of work that no one sees. Very few artists are the type to find commercial success immediately after graduating from art school, and if they do find that success, they probably don’t need me. If you’re not one of that .00001% of art school graduates that immediately gets a big studio job, or gets gallery representation, or books a huge client, then you need to have what I like to call Grit. Others might call this resilience to failure. Regardless, for one to deal with the constant emotional battle that is being a professional artist, you have to love it enough to struggle. While I don’t believe in the notion that an artist has to suffer for their art, I do believe they have to push past challenges and struggles as we will all go through these challenges no matter who we are or how successful we are.You see, the world is changing rapidly and constantly in upheaval. With technology moving as fast as it is, it’s nearly impossible to guess what the world will look like in the next five — even three — years. That said, all this technology is changing the way that businesses are run, and entire industries grow and collapse in the span of as little as a year. When I was in school, I was sort of jealous of all the students who were majoring in either VFX or game design. They all got snatched up quickly by VFX firms around the country and since mobile gaming was starting to boom, lots of my peers got picked up by that. I continued to work at my retail job and tried to pick up illustration clients when I could.Now, with most of the major domestic VFX studios shuttered or moved overseas, there is a huge number of talented VFX artists who either have left the industry or have had to move overseas. Game studios like GREE and Zynga have had huge layoffs and Zynga is finally selling their flagship gigantor building in San Francisco.Suffice to say, the world is changing rapidly, and you need to be ready for it. How? Grit.Back to grit. Back to surviving as an artist and being willing to not be successful for ten years. The reason I ask that question is that with so much upheaval and uncertainty, with so much adversity towards making a living off of your art, with entrenched gallery systems looking for certain styles and systemic injustices (ie. lack of representation of women artists in museums), as an artist, we’re all going to fail at some point. Whether it’s getting laid off from a studio, or constantly hired for contracts, then let go, then rehired on a new contact (so they don’t have to pay you benefits), or just not getting sales on your paintings, as artists we’re going to fail sometimes.Unlike a salesperson slinging a product, as artists, when we sell our art we’re selling ourselves. It’s an incredibly personal and vulnerable state to put ourselves in, and I’ll be the first to say that it really fucking sucks when we/our art gets rejected, and THIS is the need for grit. This is the reason you need to love it so much you’ll do it even if discouraged.As artists we need to be able to keep going. To acknowledge that we are disappointed/angry/frustrated/demoralized, and then we pick ourselves up and create the next piece of work. We make the next post on Instagram or Pinterest or Medium. We get our asses back up, regardless of what others tell us, and we create once again.You know what the weirdest thing is? It’s all the artists who answer “Yes,” who end up finding success the soonest. It’s the artists who are willing to take the punches, to re-invent themselves, to experiment and play, to still keep at their craft no matter what society tells them — it’s these artists who find success the fastest.I don’t mean to put all the weight of the world on us as individuals. But there is a larger game being played around us — one that isn’t fair, and is usually stacked against us. We have three choices — we can choose to ignore/rebel against the game, and struggle against it; we can choose to learn the game, and play it well and succeed; or we can choose to understand the game and the players so we can invent our own game.I get it. This is all scary stuff. The uncertainty. The need to take personal responsibility. To really get out there and put yourself at risk. But what is the greater gamble — knowing that your fear and willingness to blame others is going to be your excuse for not making it, or taking the chance that maybe, just maybe, if you choose yourself, you’ll actually be able to succeed beyond your wildest imagination?So build up your tolerance to failure. I even try to do things I know I’m uncomfortable with in order to get used to getting out of my comfort zone. Noah Kagan has this exercise where you go and ask for a discount on your coffee. You walk into a coffee shop, order a drink, and ask for a discount. If the cashier asks you why, you simply say “No reasons, I just want a discount.”This is crazy on the nerves for most people. But it’s a great way to push yourself (and it also teaches you to ask for what you want). Also, since I also totally empathize with service people, regardless of whether or not they give me a discount, I always tip them larger than usual, so I don’t feel bad about making their jobs more difficult.And while I strongly, strongly suggest the above exercise, if that’s going to give you a panic attack, try making art in a style you never work in. If you’re an abstract painter, try to make something realistic. If you’re a representational painter, try to make an abstract painting. Or remix a video. Or if you’re a video artist, draw someone on the bus. Whatever it is, do something you’re not good at. If you draw manga, draw a realistic eye for once in your life. If you’re a sculptor, maybe try basket weaving. It doesn’t matter. The point is, by forcing yourself to do something where you’re a beginner again, you’ll realize the strength in learning new skills and pushing yourself outside of your safety zone.If it’s not super apparent, this is also very important in that you’re teaching yourself a new skill. Whether it’s negotiating, or asking for what you want, or basket weaving, you’re making yourself more valuable. As I talk about in my online class, one of the main things we need to learn as artists is how to articulate our value to people who might need our skill set, so they understand what problems we’re solving and why we’re deserving of our pay rate. The tech world talks of unicorns or full-stack developers. While rare, these people are super valuable — and you only become one by getting really good at one thing then branching out to learn others.So get out there and practice building up your grit. I know it’s scary in a world where trolls can attack you and cyberbully you, or people can just generally hate on you. But in the words of Taylor Swift, hater’s gone hate hate hate hate, so you might as well learn how to ignore the haters. Your resilience to all the naysayers, doubters, haters, and legitimate setbacks is what’s going to propel you forward towards your dreams — besides, if you’re doing what you truly, honestly love, then who cares what anyone else thinks? Why listen to people who are sitting on the sidelines, too scared themselves to act? You’re the one in the game, so believe in yourself.Now get out there and push your limits and get gritty. You can do it. I believe in you.Rick Kitagawa is an award-winning visual artist, storyteller, and arts educator. He has taught hundreds of students how to break into the industry, land their dream jobs, and make a living off of their art and is the creator of Lift Off Art.Rick also happens to be developing an online course to teach artists how to make a living off their art and live the creative life of their dreams, all from the comfort of their own home. For more information, visit here.