GARRY ZAYON DESIGNER ARTISTThe beginningFurniture designLamp designs and sculpturesPaintingsIn 1996, I was selling mid century modern and Danish vintage items and furniture in the Annex flea market in Manhattan, New York. At that time 1950’s Heywood Wakefield furniture was the in thing in Manhattan. I taught myself the construction and how to refinish Heywood Wakefield was well known in New York for my process. I also refinished for a lot of stores in New York as well. The flea market started to fall apart and business became really slow. In that time period I started making my own line of furniture. That’s when I came up with my first great design, the Z-DESK. I brought it to the flea market to display and it drew in crowds of people admiring my design. One particular store owner loved it and wanted it in their store. My furniture has also been used in TV shows and movies.The Z-DESK really got me motivated in the design element of furniture. The Z-line furniture started taking off selling on a regular basis. I was also very influenced by George Nakashima and started making furniture from slabs with unique design base. At that time I started designing lamps and sculptures. My designs are influenced by mid century modern and danish designs.The scorpion lamp was my next big design. The lamp is admired by many people and there are articles written about it on the Internet. I started doing many other designs on lamps like the unique design of the atomic dog lamp. About this time I started having celebrities buy my furniture and sculptures. I was even offered a TV show but I turned it down. I did not want to relocate to California.The next phase was my paintings.Original art paintings was always a big thing with me as far as an admirer. My father, Seymour Zayon, a listed abstract artist, always influenced me with his artwork. When I was younger I used to sneak down and use his paints but nothing ever came out any good. But later in life I tried many different styles and my newest style seems to be taking off. I really enjoy doing these paintings in my spare time when I am not designing furniture.Designer and artist-Garry ZayonBorn 1955Philadelphia PaZ-DESK DESIGNED BY GARRY ZAYON BOIRE WOOD &amp; TIGER MAPLE MID CENTURY MODERN STYLINGVisit Zayon furniture many more designs and videos.http://www.zayonfurniture.com/z-desk-designed-by-garry-zayon-boire-wood--tiger-maple.htmlhttps://youtu.be/QmBsmlqqSew