How to Become a “Known” ArtistEarlier this week, I had to do something that involved putting myself out there as an artist in a pretty big way (if you came here from my newsletter you know what I’m talking about).It might have seemed simple and easy enough to an outsider, but my inner experience was utterly tumultuous.After pausing in a reflective moment of stillness, I realized that the thing that was preventing me from taking the action I needed to take to move forward was none other than the frienemy of my life: FEAR (fear of rejection, fear of ridicule, fear of dying alone as a sad old cat lady, etc.). I checked in with my body and all of the areas where it was feeling tight and bunched up, “Yep, that’s it,” I thought to myself, “ridiculous, yet very present, fear is paralyzing me.”I tell you this story because the way to become “known” as an artist is by putting yourself out there. I know that as you start to put yourself out there more and more, fear is bound to rear its ugly head up, at least once in a while.Here’s what I’ve found to be true: the best way to overcome fear is through taking action.I’d love to share with you a few actions you can take today in order to overcome fear and move forward on your artistic path.1. Decide who you want to become known by &amp; what you want to be known for.2. Find at least one way to put yourself out there in front of these people today.3. Develop a systematic plan of action that will enable you to consistently put yourself out there in front of your target audience.Now, I’d love for you to TAKE ACTION. Answer the following questions in the comments section or on your own and act on them today:1.) Who do you want to be known by and what do you want to be known for?2.) What is one outlet that caters to your target demographic that you can connect on?3.) What is the one action that you will do consistently to connect with your target audience?Let me know how it goes and feel free to leave other thoughts on this post in the comments section below or send directly to my email: [email protected]/*  */XO,This article was originally published on the Limitless Artists blog.