“ARTIST’S, CONNECT WITH THE BUYER…DON’T HARD SELL.”As many of you know I am a consultant to Galleries, Artists and Collectors. At the present time I am engaged by one of the oldest and largest Galleries in Manila, Philippines, Galeria de las Islas.My brief was to come in and change the selling practice of the Gallery and build better sales. We sell a wide range of paintings and sculpture to our many valued collectors, friends and guests. In the last ten months I have achieved the goals for the business and it has grown substantially to the point of have to employ new staff. The Gallery hired two young ladies and when they started work for the Gallery, I talked to them about selling and what I required of them in dealing with the customers.After I finished I thought about what I had said to them, and how helpful it may be to Artists who are trying to carve out a living selling their art.I told these young woman that when customers entered the gallery, to go and greet them and smile. Not to ask them if they needed help but to connect with them. Ask them questions about themselves, where are they from and to generally get them to talk about themselves. Not to talk about the paintings or sculpture unless the customer asked about the art. I want these young women to connect with the customer and allow them to tell their story and become comfortable within the Gallery, but more importantly for the young women to become comfortable talking to strangers.If the guest shows interest in a painting or sculpture and the young lady feels she can’t answer the questions any longer, then she is to get the Gallery Curator or myself and we would become involved and guide and advise the customer in what they are looking for, to begin the selling process.Now, why tell you all this?These simple principals that these girls are learning are so very important when dealing with customers. So let’s look at what I am really teaching them.1. Be a friendly face in a new environment.As much as the girls are scared of meeting strangers and talking to them, the people who come into the Gallery don’t want to meet a stranger either and experience hard selling. That’s why a lot of people when approached by a sales person who asks, “Can I help you?” the question is met most of the time with, “No thank you, I am just looking.”But it is a little hard to say that to someone, unless you are a very rude person, who says to you. “Hi, how are you today?” or “Hi, where are you from?”Not the expected question from that scary Gallery salesperson stranger.So when you are manning your Art booth at the Art Fair, approach people with the question they probably do not expect to hear from you. “Hi how are you today?”Now I am being very simplistic but you can be creative with the question?I am always amazed when Artists who are creative people, don’t want to be creative in the selling process of their own Art?Be a friendly face in a new environment.2. Get the customer talking about their favorite subject, themselves.People love to talk about themselves. Ask, “So where are you from?” can get them telling you so much about themselves and their life, at the same time giving you information upon which you begin to get an idea of how to best meet their needs.Ask them are they a collector?People like to be asked this even if they are not, as they presume that you think they are. Beware sometimes they really are, so be sincere in the question.Ask them have they bought paintings before?If yes, what was it like? If not, have you ever thought about owning some original Art?Now as long as price has not been mentioned, there is no reason at this time to bring it up.Now all this information that they have volunteered, needs to be used to lead them into the sale.During this time watch what painting they look at or even say how nice it is.3. Enthusiastically talk about your passion and love for your work.Now it’s time for you tell them how much you love your work and talk about the creation of the painting.If they are still talking with you and smiling, then go to the “assumed sale.”Tell them the cost of the painting, but I am assuming that they already know the price and there is no problem.Then ask where they will hang it, ask them to give you a photo of the painting once it is hanging in their home.Them assuming it is not a big heavy painting get it off the wall and hand it to them to hold it and let them continue to fall in love with it while you write up the sales receipt.Then ask simply and quietly, “Will it be cash or card?”Now this does sound very simplistic and yes when they find out the price they may halfheartedly ask for discount, but if they have fallen in love with the painting it is a token ask.I had a gentleman buying a very expensive small sculpture, a beautiful piece of a small girl’s head which was quite stunning. After we had talked and he said how much he liked the piece, I decided to assume the sale was closed, we sat down at the table and I placed the sculpture in front of him on the table where he could touch it. He had already asked the price, but he asked again and I told him and then just kept talking about the sculpture. He asked me if I could give him discount as his wife would ask if he had asked me. He said it with a smile and I said also with a smile that I do not give discounts and I asked him how would he like to pay for it cash or card?He said card.I then went back to asking him where he would display the piece; he said it was a gift for his wife.Your love and enthusiasm for the work will often win the buyer over.So often Artists in Art Fairs or on social platforms, cut to the sell to quickly. Now most Artists would be shocked that I say they hard sell, but they do go straight to the price and immediately defend the price.When the customer asks the price, I state what it is but immediately move on as if I did not hear it and talk about the qualities of the painting. People always ask the price so they have a reason to say no to the painting, “Oh it’s to expensive.”We talked about it in the last blog; deflect off the price onto the painting even if they tell you it is too expensive.Get the customer talking about the painting and help them to fall in love with it, before any negotiations on price. If it starts out about the cost of the painting and does not move away from there, you end up defending the price rather than talking about the great qualities of the painting. Price is never the issue and if it does become the major talking point then often the Artist has to defend his or her position, then you are on the defensive and you may win the argument but you lose the sale.I want the customer to love the painting as much as I do. I like to point out why I love the painting or sculpture and how the painting speaks to me.I want my enthusiasm and love for the piece to engage the customer, enthusiasm is contagious.1. Be a friendly face in a new environment.2. Get the customer talking about their favorite subject, themselves.3. Talk about your passion and love for your work enthusiastically.Close the sale, all done with a big sincere friendly smile.I do hope that this has been helpful to some and I do appreciate all the comments and emails.If you like this post please hit the “like” button and please “share,” thank you, it is much appreciated.Love your paintings, love painting and love yourself.Mark E Shellshear.Art consultant.[email protected]/*  */