Want to reach millions of young millennials with amazing content in a cost effective way? Contact social media artists, brief them, let them do their thing and they will rock your world.Social media artists, are young creative people who have managed to get big number of followers (ranging from 10k up to more than 8 Million) solely using a social media network.Their savviness of how the social networks’ algorithm works and ability to develop great social stories are the main reason for their success. Putting these skills to create posts for brands or small businesses has so far shown great results.If this trend continues and social media artists manage to keep delivering great micro content for brands while keeping their followers engaged the advertising industry should get ready for a big shake up. Here are 7 reasons why:The cost of working with a social media artist will depend on different variables such as the number of followers, where he is based or his experience with other brands. There is not yet a defined rate cards like in traditional online media ads.However, in my experience, the CPM (Cost Per Thousand impression) of a social media artist post is usually much lower than what you would get for an online ad placement.In addition to that, many of these artists have much higher reach within social media channels where millennials are spending most of their time than well-established global mass media networks.Organic means people see the influencer’s content because they are following them and they like what they post on their network. Paid means you are going to see this in your channel because for example, Facebook decided you fit the description of a brand target audience.Brands should not just look on how many views they achieve but also how they achieve them. An organic impression or view should be more valuable for a brand than a paid impression.Influencers are your creative team, in fact they are so creative they have managed to get millions of people to engage with them almost daily. The expensive hours brands pay for a creative director in tradition advertising campaigns are inclusive when you are working with social media artists.You will not need to pay for a production company to rent mega expensive equipment and fly to an exotic place to produce an expensive ad for you. Social media artists can do amazing micro content by just using their phone.I have worked with many different agencies and enjoy working with creative teams and account manager. But in the end agency employees are part of a big organization with revenue targets they are pressured to achieve.Influencers when contacted directly are their own Boss and will normally throw in a few extras if they like you. They are also great consultants and will tell you in your face what you are doing wrong in your own social media network.For social media artists to survive in this field they know they need to be authentic because if they are not they immediately see a big loss of followers as well as negative comments.In social media it is common to see tribes. Or people who are focused and interested to post and engage with specific type of content. There are the fashionistas, the foodies, the comedians, the magicians, the rich boys, extreme sports, memes and the list goes on.Regardless of what you are selling or where you want to position your brand you will find a specialized social media artist that is influencing these tribes and can help you do the same for your brand.In a novel piece of research mentioned in Forbes “4 out of every 5 consumers say that brands don’t behave as if they really know them”. Influencer marketing could be the way to help marketers do advertising in a more effective way. Social media artists certainly know what their followers want to see.Have you worked with social media influeners what are your thoughts about influencer marketing ?Published in Startups, Wanderlust, and Life Hacking-