The Epic And Awesome Guide To Writing Blog Articles Like A True Artist That People Want To Read And Share!This is not just any typical how-to guide though…The Mindset Stuff1. First and foremost, know that writing is art, hence subjective as hell2. “Good writing is giving a piece of your humanity back to humanity.”3. Writing is expressing your voice4. Writing is a lifestyleThat’s all for the mind.The Practical Stuff1. Use this article template which I feel can help you write substantial postsOpening paragraph-Second paragraph/body of article-Next comes the step-by-step guide-2. Don’t post up a single YouTube video or picture and call it day3. Always only stick to the theme of your story and do not share too much4. Write as much as you can according to how much you push yourself5. Be bloody consistentTo end off…If you enjoyed this article, please click on the little green heart below. I’d love you for that!Pardon me for the click-baity headline, but truly, it was made to catch your attention.Haha. I feel so proud and disgusted with myself at the same time.Well, now that I’ve gotten your attention:And you can do it your way. For however good or bad a writer you think you are, I truly believe my guide right here will help.Nope.I personally think that there’s a lot of cliched advice on writing out there, a lot of which are crap and don’t help you grow as a writer.I’ll give you ideas so you know how to approach writing with your mind.And then I’ll give you practical steps to writing articles as a basic guide.You’ll see how they all work together to help bring out the artist in you.You MUST read the entire guide for it to make sense.Ready? Let’s fucking go!This is how I like to put it all the time:Are those two series considered “good” writing to that somebody then? No, obviously not.The same concept needs to be applied to you then.However much you pour your heart and soul into your writing, somebody isn’t going to like it.Who then, ultimately can actually tell you that your writing is “good?”The answer is you.But of course, gaining a ton of validation from the masses would definitely boost your confidence in your writing.For the sake of this article, I won’t be talking about gaining validation. That to me is in the realm of marketing.We’re talking about becoming a good writer in your own eyes and your heart. We’re not here to aim to become a popular writer.Those are two different things altogether.Read on. My entire article will piece the puzzles together for you.This was what acclaimed writer Ryan Holiday told me when I consulted him.That’s it! Again:That is how every kind of art works.So the question now is: Are you writing as an artist?Are you giving a piece of your humanity back to humanity?Are you giving a piece of your life back to life?Are you pushing yourself as a writer?Or are you just trying to follow the crowd and write up a bunch of boring crap the rest of the world is already writing about?Remember, writing is art. It’s something awesome and downright personal. Use it as a medium to express yourself so you can send a special message to everybody else so that they can in turn, start to feeling something they never thought was possible.And hence, developing your own voice is important.I honestly don’t think anything else can be said here. Creating your own voice takes a bit of time.It irks me when I see others teach shit like “How to create your own voice in writing”. Don’t you see the irony in that? By following them you’re only following their voice.So to develop your voice, you need time and practice. That’s it.Keep writing. Don’t stop. Writing is a lifestyle. If you’re a writer, just fucking write and don’t stop.Take pride in being a writer and never stop expressing yourself. You’re not putting yourself out there to write just one book, one viral article or whatever and call it a day.Never, fucking stop writing.Approach writing as art so can you create for yourself your own way and not for validation only.Write to give a piece of your humanity back to humanity so people can feel something they never thought was possible.Finally, never stop being a writer. Take up the lifestyle and keep honing your voice. Nobody ever gets it right the first time. And no self-respecting writer would call it day with just one big hit or whatever.Alright! You ready for the practical step-by-step so you can start creating art that people want to read?To preface: This is just a guide. This is to help facilitate your journey as a writer.I don’t ever want to come across as too preachy and contradictory as if my words are prophetic.This is just to help you out. Ultimately, your art is yours.Let’s fucking go! I’ll be writing out the steps and then giving comments below each of them to complement them.It’s pretty straight forward and I think it serves as a great foundation for you to write articles people care about.That’s it for my template for creating substantial posts. It will look like this. This is from my own blog, How to get over death of a loved one:And I ended the post right there. I think it’s okay to conclude a post with your last takeaway point.Remember, this is just a guide for a starting point. It works very well though. Just take a look anywhere online and you’ll see the same format.Let’s move on to more practical tips.I’d actually like to talk a little about gaining some form of mainstream success as a writer.So you want go viral? Or perhaps even that book deal?It is really easy to learn anything today. All you need is the internet.That said, it is really easy to think you can emulate the success of other writers quickly and easily. And I am not even talking about scammers out there trying to pull you a fast one.Life doesn’t work that way. If you’re looking for success that way, you’d have better luck buying lottery tickets everyday.Also, you gotta know that just because somebody is good at something, it doesn’t mean that they are good teachers.If you want opportunities to come to you, then you’re going to have to be really, really consistent.Keep writing. Don’t stop. The opportunities will come. The fans will come. But the onus is entirely on you.Slow and steady indeed wins the race.The race though, is honestly against yourself.Why?So never stop writing. Never stop creating art. Never stop. You’ll find your way. You’d definitely not need my template and stuff.I hope this little guide helps.If I succeed in inspiring any writer today, it’d be that I sincerely hope you don’t have to use this guide at all one day.For more articles on business by me:My name is Alden Tan and I’m sick of bullshit in the personal development space thanks to the pretentious people out there. I love writing and I’m also a Bboy.www.Alden-Tan.comGet my free book here if you want to stay in touch with me: 12 Things Happy People Don’t Give a Fuck About! c