Get your freelance visa the smart way:So, you’re an artist… you may have visited Berlin or heard how incredible it is through a trusted grapevine (or google). You want to call this place your home, and need a bit of help getting everything in order. I’m glad you are taking the first steps for your new, adventurous life in Europe!I am a travel photographer/entrepreneur and last month (April, 2015), I accomplished one of the biggest feats in my 25 years of life. I approved for the magical freelance artist visa that allows me to legally create my art, work for clients, and get compensated while living in Germany for full 2 years. This is a HUGE deal and I celebrated accordingly.There is a somewhat meticulous process you must undertake to acquire this visa and have this freedom. The better prepared you are, the better your chances are at obtaining it. Before arriving in Berlin (with my superhero girlfriend) I did many searches on the topic. What I found was lots of contradicting information and confusing tasks that didn’t make much sense. This is precisely the main reason I am creating this article! This is for Americans interested in getting the Freelance Artist Visa!So let’s jump in…Step 1.Step 2.Step 3.This is where the rubber meets the road. Here we will find out who are the dreamers and the doers.Who will you be?Step 4.The big day has arrived, time to be positive!Step 5.As I type this, many videos and news articles related to police brutality and riots happening all over the place in the states are on my facebook timeline. Where I grew up, there has been been many times when I’ve felt a target was on my back. This is unfortunate and one of the many reasons I chose to leave my home in NYC to begin a new life here. Of course this place has it’s own set of problems; it’s not utopia. It is a beautiful, historic, affordable haven for artists at the moment though, and that works for me. I must say, I am pleased with my decision.There will be ups and downs in the process, I guarantee that. But making it past this step is incredible! I haven’t felt this free in a while.My advice if you’re thinking about doing this, is to weigh your options, and really figure out if it’s a good move for you. I can tell you that my awesome life has just got another improvement. Not saying everything is perfect, but when a book is written about my life, it’s going to be pretty dope. I’m living my dream of traveling the world, and I’m getting paid to do it, thank you universe!I honestly hope this guide helps you on your journey! If you have any questions, Please reach out! — Feel free to contact me for help on my facebook page or follow me on instagram.If this has helped you, or believe it can help someone else, please give it a recommend or a share.