Artist of The Month — November ‘15“Many creative people are introspective and struggle with authority, and that brings with it its own problems. However, if that’s the deal then I wouldn’t change it for the world.” — @jamesspringallPlease introduce yourself and since when did you start making collages?Hi, my name is James Springall. I remember making collages when I was a child.What does influence your art? Politics?Politics is everywhere and nothing is free from political influence…So, yes.What is your perspective about humanity?I have complete faith in humanity (unless I’m reading the comments section on a YouTube video or watching the news).What is the meaning of your ‘censorship’ project? Why a cruise ship?It’s a play on words! But I find the whole topic of censorship fascinating and, of course, it’s on people’s minds a lot recently because of the “Free the Nipple” equality movement. Censorship itself is actually quite a complex issue, riddled with contradictions. By its very nature it’s suppressive and clearly something a lot of people feel uncomfortable with. I thought it is interesting to censor pornographic images — another thing that some people may be uncomfortable with and find objectionable, albeit for different reasons. So, we have a situation whereby some may actually deem the original images in need of censorship, whereas others are fighting against such measures. Also, because of the restrictions imposed by social media platforms, I like the idea of playing around with what you can and can’t get away with.What is the struggle for being creative? How do you overcome with that?Creativity is a funny thing to pin down and understand. For me, it’s a way of living and — like life itself — it can be both a struggle and a joy. I’m having my apartment painted at the moment and the guy who’s doing it said I seemed tired one morning. I told him it was because I was up until 3 a.m. cutting out pictures of sushi and he couldn’t understand why on earth I would choose to do something like that with my time. Howver, an idea struck me and I felt like acting on it, and I believe that’s how most creative people are — at some point, you have no choice but to turn thought into action (although the very act of doing so can be a struggle in itself). Furthermore, many creative people are introspective and struggle with authority, and that brings with it its own problems. However, if that’s the deal then I wouldn’t change it for the world. I like what Henry Miller said in “Stand Still Like the Hummingbird”: “There is always room, if only in one’s own soul, to create a spot of Paradise, crazy though it may sound.”If there was a time machine, when would you go back in time? What would you do? Why?I’d quite like to observe Socrates (the Brazilian football player, not the philosopher) in Spain, circa 1982. And seeing The Beatles play would be something to do on a Wednesday night.How long do you spend time on Tumblr approximately?Approximately 4 minutes and 23 seconds per week.Where can people see your artwork?At http://jamesspringall.com/Originally published at whatevart.tumblr.com.