Amanda, artist moms, creative parents, we have this.The concept that you can’t have children and be creative is quietly, but dangerously laced into our culture. I believed it. Every now and then I still find myself believing it. My daughter will be three in a few months, and while I panic and worry that I don’t create in the ways that I should, or used to, or whatever, I seriously wouldn’t be able to do what I do without her.I’m not even in the position to attempt living as an artist yet; I’m finishing up undergrad work and embarking into grad school. I’m constantly terrified that I can’t do it; my writing and art will dry up, I’ll have nothing to say, I’ll love everything so much and have no time for any of it. But the most crippling concerns come from monetary fears.I am a young (I had my daughter after just turning twenty), divorced (incredibly damaging marriage), college parent, and my child and I live in my parents house. I have no financial independence to be seen. Largely due to the relationship I had with my daughter’s father, but its been almost two years since the end of my marriage and I still don’t have my feet under me. It’s scary. It’s scary trying to create when you don’t have the means to live the way you want to: creatively, or for your child.However, knowing that I want and have to create; knowing that I have goals for the life I wish to share with my daughter; knowing that I’ve fought|through the “gritty-dark-deeply-emotional” parts makes me want to fight and work harder.If I wasn’t working to have a life for me and my child, I don’t think I would have the courage to make risky-bold-strange-yet-oddly-rewarding choices in individual pieces of art or in my life. My daughter, makes me want art and makes me want to create art so much more than I could have thought possible. She makes it okay to try anything and everything to make my art work, because even if I fail, I have her. We create together in a multitude of ways. If I have nothing else in my life; creating with her, creating a person who loves to create, themselves makes all other doubts go away.I can’t say that motherhood doesn’t soften parts, at least it did for me. But running along each one of those soft spots is a razors edge, that supports and protects and nurtures that softness. It was a two fold effect. My heart bruises easier, I cry at everything (happy and sad) but I have a fierceness for my own life, the life of my daughter and the act of creating (in any form) that I had not experienced until having this amazing little human to do it with, for, and about.Amanda, you are a personal hero for me. Artist parents, you are are my heroes.I see and love you all.