Featured Artist Of The Week: Lisa Marie from DawdlingDoodlesFunny Cartoon Couple Girl Kissing and Boy Mad by DawdlingDoodlesDo you like quirky, yet pretty art? Then Dawdling Doodles has exactly what you need. Artist Lisa Marie has created a charming series of adorable and sometimes funny pieces of art, that are softly colored and simply beautiful. I had a chance to ask her a few questions a few days ago and wanted to share this interview here with you.Me: How long have you been drawing and creating art? Lisa: Pretty sure I was born with a crayon in my hand. But I’ve been making art professionally for about 5 years now (opened my studio after I completed my MA in Art History). The doodles started about 1 year ago. Mostly in my studio I create fine art portraits and I needed a way to decompress artistically, so I began doodling on scrap pieces of paper. After a while, I had a pile of cartoon images and I figured I would put them to work — that’s how my doodle blog was born.Me: Your Dawdling Doodles are charming, and showcase a quirky sense of humor. How did you come about putting them on Zazzle? Lisa: Thank you! I already had a Zazzle store showcasing my fine art drawings (http://www.zazzle.com/nosesnposesfromalm), hence opening a second store showing silly doodles (http://www.zazzle.com/dawdlingdoodles) was a fun side project at first. But then they became very popular and it just started to grow and grow! Now it’s just part of my regular studio routine.Cartoon Child with Wolf Drawing by DawdlingDoodlesMe: What is your favorite aspect of creating art for Zazzle? Lisa: I love seeing where all my customers come from! The idea that someone in Ireland or Switzerland is wearing one of my doodles on a t-shirt makes me smile! And around the holidays, when the store gets really busy, it’s really fantastic to think that people all over the world are giving my doodles as presents! Sometimes I think there’s no greater gift than the gift of humor.Me: Take us through your process of creating a piece. Do you sit down with a specific idea in mind, or do you let your creativity flow without boundaries when you sit down to create a piece? Lisa: Heh, ummm……it’s pretty sporadic. Doodles happen when I need a break from some realistic portrait that I’m drawing for a customer. Usually, I just grab a piece of paper and start to play. Eventually, one particular doodle catches my eye and that’s the one I commit to finishing. If I really want to make something pop, I’ll even put it in Photoshop and enhance some details. But I have a strict rule to never take my doodles too seriously. If I overwork a cartoon, it loses that impulsive playful feel.Me: How can the audience connect with you outside of Zazzle? Do you have any social media accounts or blogs you want to mention? Lisa: Oh, I’m all over the place! They can find me on Instagram (ArtistryByLisaMarie), they may see my fine art portraits at ArtistrybyLisamarie.wordpress.com, and they can see a new doodle every Monday on facebook at https://www.facebook.com/DawdlingDoodlesMe: What would you like to tell an independent artist out there, who is trying to get the nerve up to put themselves out there? Lisa: There will never be a “perfect time” to start, so just go for it! Really, sharing your art can be one of the greatest hurdles for a new artist. You just have to look the computer square in the keyboard and put your stuff out there!Thanks for taking the time to answers these questions.As always, please support independent artists with your purchase. And stop by again next week, when I will feature another exciting independent artist.Have a blessed day!ClaudiaOriginally published at avalon-media.org on October 7, 2015.If you enjoyed this interview, please hit the recommend button and share this article. Please support independent artists! Thank you!