The place where I grew up faced the Nairobi dump site. All the trash, all the waste of Nairobi, used to be dumped in my neighborhood.So whenever I woke up, the first thing I saw was garbage. I used to tell my dad I would like to give trash a second chance, I would like to work with trash. And that’s why, up to now, that’s what I’ve done.I’ve been making glasses since I was a child. My dad is the one who wanted me to make the glasses: he challenged me to make them. He used to have real glasses when he was young. And one day, he messed with them and crushed them by accident. He was beaten by my grandmother because of this. So he hid the glasses from that day. And I used to admire wearing glasses when I was young. He used to say, “Cyrus, if you want to wear the glasses, maybe make your own glasses.” And that’s how I started making my own glasses. I was about seven years old.Being an artist, for me, meant that I was a rebel — I was a bit rude to everyone. I don’t follow what people want — I follow what I want. I don’t really like people. I want to go my own way. So I do everything the opposite to others, and they feel, “This guy is a bit of a rebel.” When I was a little boy, grownups thought I was a bad example. They used to tell their kids, “Work hard. If you won’t work hard, you’ll be like Cyrus.” I was very different. I was always in my house, doing art, painting and making sculptures, and no one understood what I was doing. I didn’t study, I wore shaggy clothes. To them it was a bit weird. I didn’t know Sunday, I didn’t know Monday. I didn’t know.y grandmother is always trying to find me a job.When you visit her, the first thing she’ll tell you is, “If you have an extra job, if you can get a job for my boy here? He needs one.” She doesn’t understand the meaning of art and being an artist.My mother and father know that I’m an artist, but they never bothered about what kind of art I do. But when I left Nairobi to go show my art at TED2013, they all wanted to know why. So they Googled me, saw my work, and said, “OK, so this is what he does.” In our family, they don’t bother with art, except for my brother. He encourages me. My sister has a Facebook page, but we’ve never been “friends.” Today she sent a friend request, and said, “Oh Cyrus, congrats. I saw your work. Keep it up.”I think I did only one exam in my life. My dad used to be angry with me because of that. He knew. And I never performed well. After I finished high school, he said he wanted me to go to college to do electronic engineering. And I refused to join. I don’t like reading. But then he asked me what I wanted to do. I told him that “I want to do what I do: art.” And he told me to get into art school, and he’d pay for me.I told him, “No, I don’t want to study. I want to do what I’m doing. Because if I got to school I’ll follow teachers. But I have my own art. I have my own way. So if I follow a teacher, I’ll follow his way.” He said, “Cyrus, if you refuse even to go to art college, go and start your life in another place. Go do what you want.”He only wanted me to have a certificate. We believe much, in Africa, in a certificate. We believe that if you have one, that’s the life. My dad told me that if I wouldn’t go to college, to walk out of his house. And that’s what I did. I started my own life.He never supported me, and I think he was right. I think if I’d relied much on him, it would have been impossible for me to reach where I am. I think he did the right thing — to show me that I need to be myself. And I remember, I moved from his house with around 3,000 shillings — that’s around $40 — with a mattress and a stove. But the lucky thing is that I have this thing of finding money anywhere, collecting money. I find money on the ground. That’s how I survived to reach where I am.My studio used to be nine kilometers from where I live. Sometimes I used to walk every day. I remember one day I was supposed to pay rent, and I only had 20 shillings — less than one dollar. I was supposed to pay $40. I remember I crossed the road, and in the road, I found exactly the money I needed to pay it. And one day, I boarded a matatu — a bus — without any money. The conductor came to get the money. I pretended I was looking for it in my empty wallet. But I couldn’t find it and turned to look for it, and I found 500 shillings in my seat.It’s always happened. Every week I find money. Even most of my friends don’t believe me. They ask, “Cyrus, there is something that you are doing to get the money.” When I walk with my friends in a group, they joke, but when they walk with me, they find it too. When they collect money they laugh: “Cyrus, this was your money, but it’s now mine.”When I moved away from my family and started my life on my own, I had to walk long distances to work, to the studio.When I walk, I get inspired by the things that I find in the street. So I’m just walking and collecting. I don’t have high-class friends. Because people know me as the person who just collects things on the street. People feel ashamed when they are with me. When you collect in the street, you look like a street boy or madman.I find beautiful things. In my studio, it’s like a museum. Everyone takes photos of the place because it’s half very beautiful junk, and I can’t work without it.aving grown up as a bad example, I’m changing, and I’m now a good example to the community.When I was growing up, I used to have a group of youths who used to follow my life, how I live. They used to admire me. If I had long hair or nails, all of the boys in the area did too. One day the parents told me, “Cyrus, cut your nails, because our children are now refusing to cut theirs.”Now I’m trying to help whoever follows me. One lady told me, “Cyrus, I think you changed my son’s life, because he used to follow your lifestyle. In our family we never studied, but you encouraged him to finish school and he is now finished.” Being a role model came with responsibility. For example, I don’t party. I used to fear partying because kids, they’d follow what I do. If I got drunk, they got drunk. If I smoked, they smoked. I couldn’t walk with ladies in public. That’s another reason I moved away.But I don’t encourage anyone to be an artist. I try to encourage them to follow their own dreams. Being an artist, for me, is a bit of a hard life, and I can’t encourage someone to be an artist, because he’ll suffer. I’ve suffered a lot. Growing up, we were six, plus my mom and my dad. We grew up in two small rooms for eight people. One room was my mom and my dad’s bedroom, and the remaining room was kitchen, dining room, and kids’ bedroom. So I used to admire living a good life.I think I have that now, almost. I’m trying to live now the life I used to admire. But I can’t live without doing what I am doing. No art, no life.A version of this interview was originally published on the TED Blog.The TED Fellows program hand-picks young innovators from around the world to raise international awareness of their work and maximize their impact.