I found my way to photography six years ago.At the time, I was doing my art degree in England. There I was, surrounded with so many stereotypes around my nationality, which made me smile and feel inspired at the same time. That’s why I started with self-portraits: I wanted to lay open those stereotypes and change people’s perceptions.After I graduated from high school in Russia at 16, I studied politics, but I didn’t finish, because I realized that’s not the thing I want to do. So I moved to London for art school and studied at St Martin’s. My first degree was in graphic design. Afterwards, I did a degree in photography. I worked as a graphic designer, then as an art director, while in the process of evolving as a professional photographer. I tried different disciplines: porcelain sculpture, oil painting, illustrations, mixed media. My exploration of the arts helped me to realize that photography is the best tool to express my ideas. That’s what I do now, and what I want to do for the rest of my life.Photography is a tool for sending a message, not just for capturing a moment or for fashion. I describe my way of photography creation as hand-touched within the picture. I stitch costumes, glue backgrounds, draw and even cook sometimes to create the whole composition. I shoot on film, with a Pentax 67-II. This makes the process much longer than digital photography. There it is hand-touched again. I develop prints and scan them again, so the whole process of one image can take up to three months or longer.My portraits bring out people’s internal conflicts, and put them out therefor all to see.I get to know my subjects quite well. Normally, I meet with my models a lot before I photograph them. We talk, we hang out. I want them to feel warm and relaxed, and to trust me. My last project involved mostly young men. In the Russian mentality, heterosexual guys don’t really like to pose. For them to dress up or be confronted with a camera, it’s kind of doing something girly. To convince them to be my models was an issue. Their occupations are many, but all of them came to my exhibition and brought their friends. I was happy about this, because I could integrate people who are typically so far away from each other’s subcultures — some of them far from the arts field. There were punks, architects, dancers, anarchists, illustrators, graphic designers, hairdressers, old-school skinheads, all mixed together. That was the most amazing thing.I feel that my art should give a smile and positive energy. We already have so much negativity around us, and I want to balance this. People sometimes create very negative tragedy art — about war, illness, revolution, politics. And while this can motivate people to move toward more positive things, generally, when you open up any social network or news blog, there is bad news, bad news, bad news. I believe in motivation by creating something positive. Negative and positive emotions should be balanced.I want to give to my audience a little bit of fairytale. I consider my photography something that makes people happier. Like a meditation. I’m happy to hear people say that they can look at my photo work for hours and they feel healed.My photograph Hulk portrays Nikita — a bouncer, a guy who is brutal in real life — in an extremely feminine way. Everyone knows that the fact that he agreed to pose for the image makes him, in a way, even more brutal, because he’s not afraid to dress up like this. It makes him even more of a man.Some of his friends photograph him because he has such interesting features, and often he takes an aggressive pose. But anyone who knows him in person knows that he’s also very kind and sweet, and will always help you if you have a problem. People would say that he’s philosophical. So those who know him see the photo and say, “Yeah, that’s really Nikita.”Sometimes I take portraits of strangers I meet on my travels. I’ve been working on a project called “Miss Other World,” an ironic series of portraits about the Miss Universe competition.I use the word “miss” in terms of “missing something.” Miss Purity feeds herself with fast food, Miss Uniqueness is surrounded with hundreds of identical Buddhas, Miss Relevance sits in a temple, drinking and smoking, Miss Genuine — whom I met in Bali — has clearly had plastic surgery and is wearing plastic jewelry.When people meet me, and I start talking with them, people realize that actually, I’m quite normal. I’m not a freak. Art is my method for exploring the world, and identity, and to notice how people approach and accept things that are different from them. We often see others as we are, not as they are.Right now, I’m working on a book about Russian fairy tales and the Russian princesses — Tsarevnas — in these fairy tales. I want to explore the history of Russian fairy tales, because they were created before Christianity came to Russia, before religion and church. People believed in the gods of sky, forest and sun. They were very close to nature. This is becoming popular again now in Russia, and in the world in general. People are more appreciative of their connection to nature, to the supernatural — discovering one’s self, using intuition. Russian fairy tales are a metaphor for this.A version of this interview was originally posted on the TED Blog. Interested in seeing more of Uldus’s work? Follow her on Instagram and watch her TED Talk, “Wry photographs that turn stereotypes upside down,” below.The TED Fellows program hand-picks young innovators from around the world to raise international awareness of their work and maximize their impact.