Crushing Perfectionism Can Slay Artists or Create ThemWhen I was in elementary school, I was singled out by teachers as a “wonderful reader” and “imaginative writer.” I was thrilled. I was really, really good at something and my parents, my friends, and my teachers were all taking notice. As I grew, the praise continued as did my quest to read everything in sight while simultaneously writing a novel (that I would, of course, one day publish).Enter college. Ouch. I went to a liberal arts college and quickly found out that there were dozens of students who were better readers and better writers than I was. I realized that I wasn’t an accomplished grammarian and that my written work would not automatically receive glowing reviews. I battled through, but found that despite everything I was learning…I was becoming more insecure about my ability to write and even more insecure about my ideas.I felt handicapped and crippled. I wanted to be “the best” and to impress, but I couldn’t come up with anything to say. I would have a thought, begin to write it down and immediately dismiss it. I had always been a perfectionist at heart, but now I was a perfectionist who couldn’t perfect.The perfectionism was crushing my ability to create and as an artist (writer/actor/filmmaker), an inability to create is lethal. So I did what any perfectionist does…I poured over books, journals and articles to find out what I could do to stop it and regain my creative freedom. Here’s what I found/learned.Too many people point to perfectionism as a curse. It’s not. Perfectionism can be severely detrimental to the development of an artist of any kind, but it has its benefits:The trick is to separate perfectionist thoughts. Keep perfectionist thoughts that are based around improvement (How can I make this better? What would improve this?) and banish thoughts that are based around what others think (Will they like it? What will they think?).Implement these strategies to ensure that your perfectionism works for you, rather than against you:I’m not an expert on perfectionism, psychology, or creative success so take this advice with a healthy dose of skepticism. On the other hand, if this rings true for you…let me know, down below, in the comments. Do what you do best–creatively–and remember that life moves too quickly to focus purely on perfection.