1. I have no inspiration!2. Why am I making even making art?3. My next artwork will turn out better, I’ll just forget about this one.4 . Am I really any good at this?5. I don’t think anyone will like this…Realizing when we fail is the first step to overcoming our failure. Failure is how we grow, but we can’t grow unless we realize what our failures are, and how we can avoid them in the future. This article is going to outline some of the common reasons I’ve seen artists fail during my time as an artist.Enjoy the read.Failure before you even begin, depressing right? The majority of possible projects never begin because of a mental block. Most commonly known as “writers block”. But this doesn’t apply only to witters, it applies to every art medium. But before you dig a hole and never make art again, let’s see if we can find out how to overcome this problem.What is inspiration? It’s everything we see, hear, smell and feel. So what do you mean you have no inspiration!?! You have an overabundance of it! Go out and take a walk, listen to some amazing music or watch a cinematic movie. Many artists are so busy reading silly posts like this one, that they don’t even notice all the inspiring things right around them.People make art for different reasons. There isn’t one answer to this question, so it’s an important to answer this question to yourself. Some people like seeing others enjoy their art, others just like the act of making art. Whatever your reason is, find it. And if you can’t, just keep making art, because there is a reason. Even if it appears there isn’t one.Starting a project, and never finishing it. Everyone’s done it at some point. Sometimes a project is just too far gone to continue, don’t finish something just because you think you have to. But I think a lot of artists just give up on a perfectly good artwork. And most times it happens at “The breaking point”.The point where you either give up, or break through to the artwork you started out to create. If you can get past this point instead of giving up, you might just make your greatest artwork yet!Often the breaking point happens closer to the end of the project, where you look at your almost finished project and say “Is this really any good?”. And then you start to fall into the next reason on this list.Maybe not yet, if you just began drawing a week ago then you probably aren’t that great at it. But eventually, if you keep at it you will become a good artist. Odds are, if you’ve been drawing for a year then you‘re probably pretty good at it if you don’t think so. In fact, looking back at your last artwork and thinking it isn’t any good is a sign that you’re getting better.I see this so much, artists are so afraid of rejection that then never get the chance to receive the opposite. Some don’t even show there work their fear is so great. I understand where they’re coming from, but if you never share your work, that means you have rejected yourself before anyone else can even see it.And often artists have the courage to share their work, but apologize for it and say “Please don’t give critique“. But the truth is, if someone does take the time to critique your work, that means they actually like it! I know this because it’s true with me. If I didn’t like it, I wouldn’t take the time to say so. I admit there is the occasional troll, but they can and should ignored. Trolls will say anything is bad, just for the sake of saying so. And if you get hurt by their comments, you are just falling into their trap. So please don’t.I hope this comforts you in knowing that you aren’t alone in your artistic failure. Everyone fails at some point. Even if they don’t recognize it.I’ll leave you with this quote: