Why Being a Professional Artist Isn’t as Bad as You May ThinkIt takes a lot of courage to be an artist. This is especially true when people associate the quality of a job based on the wage earned. Many people associate artists as being “starving”, and struggling to make a living. But here are some benefits to being an artist you might have never thought about.First, it is important to define what an artist is. If you type in “artist definition” on Google, you will get this: “ a person who produces paintings or drawings as a profession or hobby.” Many use this definition, but art can be anything that is the product of someone’s creativity. It is not restricted by pen and paper.I think it is also important to eliminate the myth that all artists are financially unstable and living in their parents’ basement. The Bureau of labor statistics states that the job outlook for artists is only 2%, which is considered slower than average. However, artists often work independently and have higher salaries. The Huffington Post states that studies show that the median salary for artists is $43,000. This is higher than the average labor force, which has a median of $39,000. Additionally, a total of 35 percent of artists are self-employed. This means they don’t have to worry about having a bad boss, because they are their own business.Living a creative life can also benefit your health. In a study by released in the Journal of Psychosomatic Medicine, writing resulted in “improvement of CD4+ lymphocyte counts.” This means that it affected the cells in patient’s body and helped improve their immune system. Being an artist can also help your mental state of mind. In a study conducted by the American Journal of Public Health activities like moving the mind and body creatively can relieve stress and anxiety.The things an artist creates have the ability to affect them on a deeper emotional level. For example, the other day I was on the street with my typewriter writing custom poetry for random passersby.The best part of the experience was seeing people’s joy when they saw the typewriters, and when they saw the poem. Some people were so excited about poetry and typewriters that they wanted to take pictures as I wrote.Their excitement energized me, and I felt validated in what I was doing.While being an artist is a valid career, this is not to say that it is easy. There are many obstacles with being a professional artist, such as marketing yourself and the dreaded writers and creative block. People may seem way more talented/qualified than you.While there is a lot of talent in the art world, and it can seem intimidating, the author Michael Craig-Martin says: “The important characteristic for anyone wanting to be an artist is desire: the passionate, inexplicable desire to make art.”If you are passionate enough, a profession as an artist could just work for you. It will require work an determination, but it has its own unique benefits.