How To Not Frustrate An ArtistAs an artist, I tend to have my ups and downs with my work and how I collaborate with people for commissions. I do commissions because I have an overflowing madness over drawing and creating visuals for a story and I always believe that I can turn this asset to building up my investment. But as an artist, I have a lot of cases which involves frustration with people I connect everyday as I do art.Yes, I do draw. But the excessive repeats of that sentence is usually frustrating for every artist. People would come by and ask for drawings of their selves and walk away.People would usually watch me draw but for Pete’s sake stop instructing me with what I draw and criticizing the proportions I’m trying draw.“The arms are not proportioned.”, “Why is he short?”, “Why is his face like that”, “Don’t you think he’s a bit thin?”Artists have their own way of presenting a character, a place, a prop or any visuals they see from their imagination — and this is not your imagination so stop instructing them.I have a lot of friends who insist in drawing them for free just because they are my friends. Now this is a wrong concept for investment because artists tend to get abused by their fellow friends. Always consider their struggle and do not abuse their talent because they are your close friends. In an artist eye, you are simply just one of their clients — friends or not friends.In commissions, people fail to understand what art block exceptionally means. Designs that are expected to be from scratch, designs that should fit a specific theme — you can’t ask the artist to have an idea just pop out of their head. These ideas have to be thought over and over again before they could even integrate it. I experienced many commissions whereas my clients would initially be very demanding and it’s normal of course. But then it’s your turn to understand us this time for we won’t be able to present you the very exact design you like in less than a minute.Often times, clients would scratch their head and wait and wait and wait. They turn down designs and expect a better result from the artist. I’ve been doing graphic designs for people and I do know the struggle of asking for their patience because it is definitely difficult to match up your client’s taste. It’s frustrating to hear them repetitively ask, “Are there any more good designs?”, “Have you thought of more designs to choose from?”I had an incident with a psychology professor who commissioned me to draw for her daughter’s 18th birthday and I was definitely incensed with her comment regarding the work I produced. As an artist, I’m definitely asking for your opinion in a way that is said in a professional way. Always pinpoint an artist’s mistake in a way they are to going to feel like you are welcoming the errors.Artists have experienced a lot. They often know what’s good and what’s not. So do trust them with what they think that will work for your idea. Your idea may be a bit too complex or your idea may be a bit too simple for a theme. Trust them, isn’t that the reason why you’re paying them?It’s always fun to get to work with people and create their visuals come to life. It’s much enjoyable to get to talk with people who possess passionate spirit and thought for a certain thing and you are there, right in front of them, helping them see another world. What frustrates me the most is people get to be very close-minded with work and that they enjoy the idea they have. Remember that artists are not there for you to boss around but we are here to help you see a better view of your world. We do not ask for instructions to which you expect us to follow strictly. Definitely not, nope. Give us your idea, we give our idea. Together we can probably create a better world and story for all of us.