How to become a successful artist…?(This post was originally sent out to the subscribers of my personal email list)Certain things are supposed to be in certain way. We as a society have set up some kind of unwritten rules for how certain things are supposed to be — labels that we strive to be able to put on ourselves.Every striving artist is bombarded with blog posts, articles, tweets from and about artists that have “made” it. Every day, we see cool people having huge exhibitions or earning millions on a single picture. The archetype of creators. The alpha artist!I’m sure those kind of stories will make thousands of would-be brilliant artists lose hope and just stop trying; because “I’ll never be as successful, so why even try?”But haven’t we got it all wrong — aren’t we searching for success in the wrong places? We have our eyes set on a goal so far away that we will give up long before we reach it. And we’ll miss out on all the opportunities and connections along the road we are so decided to stay on!When can you call yourself successful, as an artist? Is it really when you manage to earn a full income from your art? Or when you’ve had your first big breakthrough, and loads of blogs and magazines have written your name? If that is the way we measure success in art, it is certainly hard to acheive.“I need to SAY THIS!” That’s the incentive for most artists. A story that needs to be screamed from the rooftops! But if telling her story is the lifeblood of the artist, why do we measure success with something that doesn’t have anything to with that — money?Shouldn’t it be measured in whether or not you are able to create your art without having to think about pleasing others? If you can tell your stories in exactly the way you want to? Being able to spend the time you need without having to worry about how to pay the bills?Yes, being “rich” and “famous” would solve the money issue. But most of us aren’t that and we will probably never be. Does that mean we have to change what we write, shoot, paint or dance so that more people will like it, so that more people will pay for our art? Are we still successful if we earn money on doing something that isn’t really us? Isn’t that… failure?Nothing new and unique will ever come from someone who is trying to please everyone. We have the obligation to need to make people angry! Or happy. Shock them. Have them write love mail or hate mail! It doesn’t matter which one, it means that you touched someone, agitated their minds.Have the guts to do your thing! You are the only person who can, and I promise you that whatever you are into (I really mean ANYTHING), do it and there will be people out there resonating with you and your art. You need to get it done and get it out there. Then repeat. Again and again and again. Suddenly, your audience will find you.Find a way to make sure that you can create exactly what you want to create.If you need to, get a day-job for a few hours every week, so that you can spend all of your focus on your arts whenever you are creating. Getting a job (or keeping the one you have for a little longer) doesn’t make you less of an artist. If it gives you the opportunity to make art YOUR way — it makes you MORE of one!After all — whether you photograph, sculpt, paint, dance or sing — there’s no way you will be able to create for 18 hours a day. Your head would be mush. Use a few of the hours every week to give yourself a stable platform from where you can create with a feeling of safety.You are not less successful as an artist just because you don’t earn a full income from your art. Getting rich or famous shouldn’t be your goal. You need to define success to yourself; is it earning loads of money or being able to create the things that you really want to create?If you believe — like I do — that it is the latter, you have everything you need to be successful right here and now.If you enjoyed this post, do you mind hitting the ❤ so that more people will find out about it? Thanks aaaaah bunch!