There is a saying “We are neither our emotions nor our thoughts” by Eckhart Tolle from the book “The Power of Now”. Our mind always wants to keep us in our comfort zone and it doesn’t want any challenges, that’s why this mind is telling you not to study. If you follow this lazy mind you’ll go nowhere in life..Really?It all began when I was 8 or 9. Back in school, one would often see me holding my ears outside the classroom, smiling at them. I never liked books and they wanted me to love it. I would go about daydreaming. I would try to jump off the wall and run away from school. I remember being suspended enormous amount of times for not doing my homework, skipping school, puncturing my class teacher’s vehicle and what not (laughs)I had a knack for music. I used to just listen and hum for hours forgetting what’s happening around me. One would often see me at a nearby cybercafe with my headphones plugged in. The only thing that I could love was the playing of an instrument..:) So when I grew up ,I had already decided to be an Artist. We had a band and we would jam on Sundays. We had already started doing small gigs, life was awesome!One morning my dad asked me if I plan to do my MBA after college. After a bit of reluctance, I could finally muster the courage to tell him that I want to become an Artist in life and not study something that I don’t like. There was utter silence for a minute. He walked away!I had my answer and I decided to leave. I went to Bombay and witnessed the professional music industry for the first time. Things weren’t easy and I knew they wouldn’t be..:) The struggle began with me having to stay at a chawl and skipping meals. I was mistreated by almost everybody that I had gone to. From a luxurious SUV, I had come down to local trains where people would beat each other up to board a train. No wonder, I was also beaten up (laughs). The scorching heat of the sun would sometimes be intolerable and I would want to go back to my air-conditioned room,but the very thought of doing something I don’t love would frighten me more than this! After struggling for days and knocking on every producer’s door, I landed up fetching an advertisement jingle for myself. Can’t tell you how happy I was! Not because I was getting paid, but because I was getting paid for something I love doing..:) I can’t express that very feeling!However, nothing magical happened after that and I had to start doing a job after a few months because there was no money left to buy food. But the learning and experience I acquired did not let me quit! I kept trying in spite of doing a 12hr job and getting wrecked every day. While doing this job however, a sense of realization struck me that relates to the Indian Education system.Almost everyone wants to pursue what they love but 7.88% of the population is able to follow their passion in India. Why?Half of the population is not aware of the passion inside them and those who do, there’s no platform..You don’t have colleges in India which give you degrees like MBA in Music/Dance/Painting followed by campus recruitment from corporate biggies giving you in fat cheques. So practically we follow what people have been doing to live a “secure” life in India. We get into a job that we literally hate thinking “Apne Kapoor Saahab kya kahenge?” . We are scared as shit of failures and above that we can’t deal with what the likes of uncle Ram, Shyam and his wives, the relative who lives abroad etc have to say.The education system of India instills in us one tenth of what it promises. What it gifts is a degree which is supposed to fetch a job and it does but in the pursuit of money, one loses his creativity, passion and above all Happiness!You’ve got to make your parents happy. You have to settle down in life,buy a house, buy a car, get married and have a baby. Goes without saying that marriage is the soul(sole) purpose of life and you have to look great for the in-laws. After all, Who would marry a struggling artist,a novelist,a poet,a cartoonist,a future CEO… and all of these have to happen before you turn 30. In the bluest of hell, living life on your own terms is not happening(Laughs).I strongly believe that there’s nothing greater than hope in life and I continue to try as the days go by, because someday, somewhere…I will be doing what I love and be happy..:)