How to never starve while pursuing a career in the arts world.When you do finally get that gig, remember you are not at the mercy of the organization that hired you. Read your contracts, negotiate before signing. Know your worth and make sure your worth is known while being reasonable considering the financial constraints within the organization you are working with. (In other words, don't be a diva when you're not already there yet.) If you're working with a nonprofit you can easily look up their taxes, see how much they pay their artists and other additional factors that may play into it like union member , out-of-state expert, repertoire etc. Through that you can determine what areas/qualifications you lack in order to be paid the desired amount by the company you are with and work from there. Being an artist is hard and sometimes when we get that gig, we are so excited to do it that we'd do it in under any condition! However, doing that too many times can earn you the reputation of a person who often works for free or at a lower rate. Don't get taken advantage!Alright, so earlier I mentioned volunteering which is pretty unavoidable. Anyone in performing arts will have volunteered for an organization at one point or another to get their foot in the door. However, there comes a time when you know you've earned your stripes and that is when to start asking for pay.Number one is the biggest problem with artists today. In fact, the reason I was inspired to write this post was because I had recently interviewed for a position but was passed up by another candidate who had been doing the work for free. Thus, is the fallacy of nonprofits. However because I hold myself at a certain standard, in the end I know wherever I end up will be more fruitful. It is easier to get a job for free as an artist, so it is even easier to get into the cycle of working for free for résumé space. But until you are confident enough to put a pricetag on your work and are able to justify it with the advantages that make you the unique individual that stands out from the rest — no one will honor what you deserve.