I Think My Dad Might Secretly Be An Internet Scam ArtistTO: HilalFROM: DadSUBJECT: Urgent Business MatterDear Beloved Daughter,Perhaps this message will come to you as a surprise, but please permit me to tell you about a business matter I have in mind.As you know, your mother’s birthday is fast-approaching. I am seeking permission to transfer funds of USD 200 urgently and without delay to you. With these funds, I wish for you to purchase your mother a surprise birthday present, preferably that Fitbit she’s been wanting in the color green.Remain blessed,DadTO: HilalFROM: DadSUBJECT: CONFIDENTIALA thousand apologies, respected child. In my previous message, I failed to request that you please reply (urgently) not to this account, but the other one, the [email protected]/*  */ one. Mom doesn’t know about that account.Thank you and God bless,DadTO: HilalFROM: DadSUBJECT: Please fax me for more detailsHonorable daughter,It might interest you to know that the desired Fitbit is available for purchase not only at all major retail establishments, but also — at a deeply discounted price — on eBay. If interested, the eBay vendors would require the following information: 1). Your full name. 2). Your telephone and fax numbers. 3). Your bank name, address, routing and checking account numbers. 4). PayPal. 5). Social security. 6). Gym access code. You must be the electronic signatory on all forms.May God shed His light on you and the Democratic Republic of Congo,DadTO: HilalFROM: DadSUBJECT: Do you love your motherPrecious human,As you may or may not have heard, Mohammad Ougando Douglass, son of the late Nigerian Head of State, died last Tuesday of a heart attack. If you are current on trends in world news and international public health, you might surmise that his untimely passing is basically due to not owning a Fitbit. No pressure, esteemed daughter, but your mother’s birthday is in three days. Consider buying the model with the heart rate monitor.Yours Faithfully,Dr. BabaTO: HilalFROM: DadSUBJECT: Fax machine down, use satellite messaging insteadHello Dear,A quick update to inform you that your brother has now successfully purchased a legal and authenticated Fitbit, transferring funds to the Target Corporation, Cherry Hill, New Jersey retail branch. Telex: 6731689. The deal was finalized at 17:00 hours. Please consider using your transferred funds to purchase something else, perhaps one of those NutriBullet things as your mother’s on this weird health kick lately.Yours in Krishna,DadThanks for the 💛 Medium!!