Dear artists,Make me. Make me want your art. Make me want to give you my money. Make me want to tell everyone about your crowd-funded project. This is an opportunity.It’s time to stop asking for donations. You are not a 501(c)(3) organization. You are not helpless. You are not a charity. “We just need your help,” is no longer valid. What you need is to earn my money and attention.It’s time to start selling compelling products. A product is the recording, or movie, or performance art piece you are raising funds to make. Each of those packages and bonuses you offer in the sidebar of your campaign profile with different tiers of giving are products. A product is an experience that changes me. A product is how you share the experience that my money and time will enable you to have. Sell a product to me.Tell me a fucking story. Who are you? Why are you interesting and deserving of attention? What are you making? Why are you making it? How will you make it?The story is not that you have a Kickstarter or Indiegogo campaign. The story is not that you can’t figure out how to pay for the project yourself, or get someone else to pay for it.The story has to be a narrative. It has to have structure and style. It has to help me remember and understand the message you, the storyteller, are communicating.Make the story easy to understand. Make it easy for me to share it with a friend during a brief conversation. Make it good enough that I feel comfortable sharing it on my personal Facebook and Twitter accounts. Make me want to share it because it’s remarkable, not because I’ll feel bad for not helping you.Tell me what I’ll get when I help you. Make that more obvious than what you will get. Will I have a special experience? Am I part of the story? How will you keep telling me the story during and after the project? Will you do something that makes me proud and excited to be a human?Do the best you can with what you have now. The production quality of promotional materials around your campaign is less important than the ideas you communicate. I will forgive all if I love your idea.You can do this. You are an artist. You can conjure beauty and meaning out of nothingness. You can make me want to help you. You can make me say, “wow! This needs to exist in the world.”Be creative. That’s your job.Follow me on Twitter. ☺