5 Ways Goodvibepeople Helps Up-And-Coming ArtistsSo you want to be in the music industry? You’ll be happy you met us. Goodvibepeople provides specialised artistic services for up-and-coming acts that wish to elevate their music careers. In this era where Indie artists have total control over their careers, doing everything yourself can seem overwhelming at times.There simply isn’t enough hours in a day to practice, take care of all the aspects of your career all while holding a steady job to pay the bills. At some point, you are neglecting key aspects of your career that prevent you from getting to the next level. This is where Goodvibepeople can help. We provide Label services for artists on an Indie budget.2. Creative Content: In this digital age, being able to regularly put out quality media is everything. We live in a visual world that constantly feeds on video content. Goodvibepeople can handle all aspects of motion picture you might need; music videos, editing, teaser clips, event caption and more. All this to fit your budget, from basic-level editing to high-scale professional enterprise, we will assign a videographer to suit your needs (and wallet).3. Publicity: What good is making great music if no one knows you exist? Getting the word out about your band is essential in this noisy world. That is why we teamed up with music writers and publicists to work in getting your name out there. From press-writing to reviews and featured articles to pitching your music to different blogs and music outlets, Goodvibepeople has it all.4. Social Media: Social media is the single best way to stay in touch with your fanbase. We know that constantly managing and putting out content on a regular basis on different outlets can be a tiresome job. Goodvibepeople can manage your social media accounts and put out quality content that is relevant to your personality and brand of music.5. Booking: Is your music festive and up-beat? Would it play well in a party atmosphere? Goodvibepeople is looking for in-house artists to add to their roster to book for concerts and events in the Montreal area. If you are a mature and experienced act and think you have what it takes, submit for consideration. All genres accepted.Can’t wait to get started? Neither can we. Send us a message to start your custom campaign now.