Artist or Entrepreneur?Most people are not really entrepreneurs but they think thats what they should be. That it’s the sexy thing, the in thing, the right thing, the thing that will solve all their problems….it will give them freedom, more money, more time, no one will control them…entrepreneur definition- a person who organizes and operates a business or businesses, taking on greater than normal financial risks in order to do so.artist definition- a person who practices any of the various creative arts, such as a sculptor, novelist, poet, filmmaker, photographer, designer etc….I want you to take a good look at the two of those definitions…You might possess some of both qualities…BUT let’s take 80/20 rule into effect here. Which encompasses 80% of who you are? Which one encompasses 20% of who you are?Now when you answer the ? which one you have the most qualities of…Next ask what do you spend the majority of your time doing? WHAT DO YOU LOVE DOING?When you find out what you REALLY LOVE! What you can become world class at and focus your attention there…Life will get a lot easier…See some people are GREAT at getting business but might not be as great at fulfilling the business because they aren’t really the artist or the talent.Not other people are GREAT at the fulfilling part, the creative part but NOT so great at getting the business…well they are the starving artist…who typically has their priorities all jacked up…they think they need to RUN THE SHIP…BE THE “ENTREPRENEUR”…well you may have entrepreneur qualities…you are NOT ONE!Here is a shift you can make that could make a HUGE difference in your life!!If you aren’t an employee working FULL time for someone else (WHICH IS NOT BAD) but rather you are trying to do your own thing. If you have been struggling for YEARS to make money on your own….but you answered the question that you are the artist or talent but not so great at getting business. Well I’m here to tell you that if you don’t work for someone else that YOU WILL have to learn to “sell” in some capacity…but there are TWO very different way or people to “sell” to.Let’s use the “videographer” or “photographer” as an example!You know you LOVE editing but you are also “capable” of shooting, talking to people, audio, creating proposals etc. But you also have been just “getting by”….Let me propose something to you. two scenarios…Let’s use getting work to photograph or shoot schools…remember you LOVE editing though.1. You have to find school after school after school after school and sell to each and every single one of them. Negotiate, schedule, shoot, many many other things…and then FINALLY edit…but not just edit and be done but rather go back and forth about the editing with the client…and when they are finally happy…you are done…but not really…now you have to go through the whole process again to get to the one SLIVER of thing you REALLY LOVE which is editing.2. FIND/SELL to someone who is GREAT at getting business, managing contractors, finding shooters, etc…but NEEDS a GREAT editor. Now you still have to “sell” in this scenario but rather have to possess a lot of traits you don’t possess or don’t come natural to finally get to the point where you get to do what you REALLY LOVE! You only have to learn and overcome the fear of ONE main thing and that is reaching out and finding people who are GREAT at doing all the thing you HATE but you possess a trait they don’t but need and that’s EDITING smile emoticonYou are NOT a failure because you are NOT an entrepreneur or can’t run a business with TONS of moving parts.Failing is going years and years and years and continuing to run into a brick wall living the majority of your life doing things you hate and have a “SLIVER” of your life getting to do what you really LOVE!See you will ALWAYS have to do things you don’t like from time to time…that’s NOT the point! The POINT is that you do things you don’t like doing the minority of the time and the MAJORITY of the time you are doing things you LOVE!!I know MANY people who are NOT FULL TIME employees for someone but make FULL TIME GREAT MONEY and they get to work at home on their hours and DO WHAT THEY LOVE EVERYDAY! They don’t have to worry about doing a ton of things they aren’t good at or don’t LOVE they get to spend the majority of time doing what they LOVE!Don’t think you’ll have more time or make more money trying to do everything…cause I would ask how’s that working out for you…if the answer is not so well then all I ask is that you open your mind a little bit and see things…see the world a little differently!PEOPLE are out there that NEED YOUR SKILLS and YOUR TALENTS because they do not possess them and YOU NEED THEM as well!!Life doesn’t have to be so damn difficult! We have just been influenced in such a way that it really screws up our life!!Believe me I KNOW because I’ve been there done that……You can turn it around it’s NOT to late!!Rock and Roll :)Rock and ROLL