And how about the disrespect to Beyoncé? Does she really require a self-appointed advocate?Not called to the podium for any reason, Kanye nonetheless concocted an excuse to take the trip. He gained nothing, unless life is to be gauged by attention. But what he lost is more interesting.The quote the media ran with is “Beck needs to respect artistry” and should give the award to Beyoncé.Fine.So let’s break down the numbers, as music people would, if we had a version of ESPN to call our own.Artistry: Humanity has a definition of “artistry,” Kanye proposes an alternate: “Things that Kanye likes.” It’s this definition, which ignores the history of creative endeavor, that is so gravely injured at the Grammys every couple of years.Respect: Kanye’s outburst is a great argument for organized sports in middle school, as they try, in my experience, to teach a workable definition of that word. Win or lose, do teams line up at the end of the game and shake hands and say “good game?” Yes. And if one team thinks a ref blew a call, do they blame the other team? No.Applying that to last night, Beck didn’t “pull off an upset” in any way. He made a record, and sat in a chair while others voted. Did the man calling for respect think to respect that?For those who didn’t turn the TV off, Bey settled it in her own way, with a performance and a wounded-but-still-strong glance at the cameras that seemed to absolve the entire planet—almost none of whom voted.(I’m sure someone’s GIF’ed the moment. It’s a classic glance, one reserved for flamenco dancers and coloratura sopranos who’ve moved heaven and earth before your eyes, and you’re welcome. You unwashed hordes. God, she’s good.)Need: For a narcissist, this is a tough one, because everything feels like a need. But the Grammys have done an exceptional job at proving how terrible they are as an indicator of “artistry.” As a case study, consider that Sam Cooke never won a Grammy, whereas Kanye has a boatload of them. How does “need” factor in? And how do these gold Gramophones ultimately affect the artistry? Obviously, it’s not the art that needs the hardware.Meanwhile, you don’t call out to respect artistry by disrespecting the artists you want the world to respect.That is, unless you don’t respect artistry yourself.If you enjoyed reading this, please click “Recommend” below.This will help to share the story with others.Learn more about Mike Errico: www.errico.comFollow Cuepoint: Twitter | Facebook