The Perils of “Hope Labor”: How Patreon Is Failing Starving ArtistsLike many writers and content creators these days, I’m on Patreon; and, like many of them, I’m not sure how I feel about it. Mike Errico writes:Although a handful of creators have found success on the platform — most notably Amanda Palmer, who earns around $30,000 per month from 7,000 patrons — they’re mostly artists who have a large following already. (At a more realistic level, basic income advocate Scott Santens earns around $1,000 per month from just over 150 patrons.)I think the patronage model is a great idea — when it works. But not if it just replicates the inequalities inherent in our current system.Artist Molly Crabapple writes:Patreon seems like a way to address this issue—a way for the private sector to step in and do what the government won’t yet do. But I’m worried that it’s just another case of Silicon Valley profiteers skimming a cut off of people at the bottom of the labor market. It’s a kind of get-rich-quick scheme that seduces people into creating content for free.In an interview at Chronicle Vitae, Miya Tokumitsu discusses the concept of “hope labor,” as coined by media scholars Kuehn and Corrigan:In order to be a successful creator on Patreon, one first has to take several steps “on spec”. This might involve posting free content to Patreon; writing content elsewhere, such as on Medium; or posting requests for patrons on Twitter and other social media channels. All of this back-end work, which largely goes unseen, is still no guarantee of success.And yet the prospect is too good to pass up: one could be just a few tweets or a viral blog post away from a treasure trove of eager patrons.As Tokumitsu writes:This multi-tiered workforce applies to Patreon too. Take a look at the image to the left. All of the examples shown are of creators who make at least $1,000/month. But this is the cream of the crop, not the average user of the platform. Destin, of Smarter Every Day, recently interviewed President Obama; Neil deGrasse Tyson is the host of the popular Cosmos TV series.Here’s a more representative sample. Most writers don’t make any money on Patreon because there isn’t that much money to be made. We don’t yet live in a culture that values supporting artists before they create their art — or so that they can create it. That’s the cultural narrative Patreon will have to shift if it wants consumers to take its model seriously.There’s nothing wrong with top artists getting a bigger piece of the pie. But what I’m concerned about — and what I hope Patreon is concerned about — is finding a way to make life easier for everyday artists struggling to get by. In an excellent article about hip-hop artists who use Patreon, Creatrix Tiara writes:The time and energy an artist spends promoting their Patreon page is not inconsequential; many create videos, contests, and other forms of outreach in order to attract supporters. That investment is a gamble.If the goal of Patreon is to give artists the freedom to focus on their art, it fails at it — it simply adds more busywork to their to-do list.Tokumitsu laments this kind of hope labor:So far, Patreon is at best a subscription service for established artists, not a way for struggling artists to find support, or even peace of mind. Most artists are probably better off making money the old-fashioned way — selling their merchandise, applying for grants, going on tour, working a day job.By giving artists false hope, Patreon helps maintain the status quo. It doesn’t address the root causes of why artists struggle to get by. It claims that an artist can “spend more time creating” — but what exactly will they be creating? More art, or just more promo materials?Artists don’t need another platform on which to distribute their work for free; they need real financial security.As musician Brian Eno puts it:It will take more than crowdfunding to make that happen.****Like this post? Please hit Recommend and share on social media, and consider supporting my future writing with, well, a Patreon pledge.