Artist or not?My name is Hari, I’m 22 years old, and I’m clueless. If there has been one feeling that has predominantly been present in me, right from childhood, it’s this cluelessness. Now most of you, might consider this to be a curse. For me however, it is a superpower. Since forever, I’ve always been able to do what I wanted to do, without thinking will it help me in what I do two years later or not, because I had no clue whatsoever, what I’d be doing two years from then. This means I played football when I wanted to, and switched to cricket when I got bored of football, and then went back to football when I felt like it.Another thing that went along with my cluelessness, since as far as I can remember, is my craving for stories. Old or new, sad or happy, ugly or beautiful, I loved listening to stories. Real stories. So I would sit with people and listen to them talk. Recently, all this paid off, when I started telling stories for a living. I met a bunch of people, who believed in telling stories just as much as me, and now we tell stories to the world. Well, India for now to be honest. And then the other day, after one of my performances, this theatre artist and RJ (who has been doing this for years) walks up to me and goes “Hari, you’re a true artist”. Now you guys are all thinking, that must have made Hari feel really happy! Nope. You want to know how it made me feel? Wait. Leave the how. You want to know WHAT it made me feel? Made me feel this army of sweat beads, moonwalking on my balls! It is scary, when people believe in your talent, especially when that talent much like Santa, isn’t real.Let me help break things down. Imagine this. Imagine I’m really good at sex (which I am btw). And I have sex with a lot of women (which i don’t btw) and I’m a jolly young fellow, living a happy life. Now God comes to me one day, and says “ Son, you’re a true (Sexist?) ‘talented at sex’ person. It’s your responsibility, to make the world a happier place with all your abilities.” Now that’s pressure! Something I was happily doing till now, has suddenly become a responsibility! So like every other superhero, I had my crisis moment, where I went “ Wait! Everybody calm the fuck down! I am not an artist.” And they went “ Look at him, humble like a true artist.” So since people wont stop believing in the artist in me, I’m determined. To prove them wrong, and this is my first step to that goal. I don't have the ability to write, my grammar sucks, and the last book I’d read was written by Enid Blyton. I am not an artist. I know I’m not. But to prove my point, I’m going to write. Long boring vents like these. I am not trying here to be a bad writer! This is all I have got! So if anybody ever stumbles upon what I am writing now, and what I’ll write after this, let me give you an overview of what it will be. It’ll be stories, musings and vents, with bad grammar and crappier humour. Don’t tell me I did not warn you. I wish though, that I was making the world a happier place with all my ‘sex talents’. Such a fun hobby! And somebody needs to come up with a word for someone who’s good at sex!Till next time.