Artist Feature: Tara Gill“There are some who can live without wild things and some who cannot” — Aldo LeopoldTara Gill is an artist and photographer whose recent focus is botanical photography. It is all about connection and belonging for Tara. Her life began with two major separations. She was placed in a foster home at birth and at 9 months she arrived in the family she grew up with. These separations instilled in her the need to understand how she is connected to the whole, that whole that’s so easy to forget. Nature is her model for the intricacies of human connection, a reminder of life’s cycles and she feels an abiding debt, sense of belonging, and love for the wild.Tara’s works have shown at the SFMOMA Artists Gallery in San Francisco and the Sutter Breast Center in Santa Rosa, California. Tara lives and works in the San Francisco Bay Area.Follow Tara, @taragill and her creative process on Bluebird Art. Select works shown here are available for purchase in the app.What inspired you to be an artist / photographer?I often turn to the wilds to restore and ground myself. I am always accepted outside among the trees. It seemed only natural to celebrate and interpret this connection with my camera. Plants speak to me. They grab my attention and whisper their beauty secrets in my ears. I listen. I put their words into my hopper, let them bubble gently, and interpret what they told me.What is your favorite part of being an artist? What do you find most rewarding?One of the highlights of my career is placing many pieces in a brand new breast care center for Sutter Hospitals (hospitals located across the San Francisco Bay Area). I custom designed eight pieces for the space and had art in every room. When the last piece was hung, I was taken on a tour of the facility from the perspective of a patient. It really hit me how art in such an environment serves an important purpose. Art holds space for the unseen things that go on in people and can act as an anchor.How would you describe your work?Pattern, modern, clean, design with symmetry.What do you hope your art provides to people?A space holder. A space to rest, contemplate, dream and feel connected.What are you currently working on?Patterns of Growth is my most active body of work. It explores the life cycles and design of plants. I hope this exploration helps people appreciate how plants support all life on our planet.How has your artistic style evolved from when you first started?I started shooting film and developing prints in my darkroom. Regardless of the technology, the thread that consistently runs through my work is nature and/or our place in it. I also use photography to express complex emotional processes. Influences that have altered my style include my study of graphic/digital design and the advancement of digital photography.What about your work do you think resonates with the buyers of your pieces?Plant life is familiar to us all. Patterns are calming because they can bring a sense of order to chaos. Has the process of evolution left behind in us an atom of all we have evolved from? Is that the spark of recognition we feel when we see nature?