Artists: Why Living in New York is still worth it.While many artists are fleeing New York for more affordable living situations and less competitive markets, if you want to be a pro New York is still the city you want to be (at least for a little while).Competition: I have a friend who says, “If you want to be great at tennis, you have to play against great tennis players.” In New York there is an abundance of players. According to a dubious website published in 2012, there are approximately 18,963 actors in Equity in the New York and about 28,963 SAG-AFTRA members, not taking into consideration crossover numbers. Translation into actor math, there are a lot of actors in New York. Aren’t you glad we didn’t major in statistics?I won’t sugarcoat the challenge that goes along with this — you show up to an EPA for the Seagull and there are 150 Ninas ahead of you. While you wait for your turn you remember with fondness nailing the role in your community theater and all the positive affirmation that went along with it. Then you find yourself 30 seconds into your monologue before the auditor stops you and says thanks, giving you your cue to leave.I get it; it feels better to be a big fish in a small pond rather than a minnow amongst the whales. It is a sink or swim market but, if you keep swimming, you’ll almost be forced to get better. If you want to book the job you have to see every opportunity in the text, be ready with specific and bold choices while being flexible for adjustments and new direction. The competition, while overwhelming, is one of your greatest tools for improving your craft.Role Models: Speaking of great tennis players, in New York, you see the best of the best. Let’s say you book a job. First of all congratulations, I’m so proud of you, go call your mother. Second, look around at the actors on the job with you and figure out whose work and career you want to emulate. How do they prepare their text? How do they take direction? How do they collaborate with the actors in their scenes? What are they like before the curtain goes up or the director yells action? Because whatever they’ve figured out has sustained them professionally and creatively and you have a front row seat to take notes.Access: One of the best parts of living here is that the distance between you and some of the best work being made today is a subway ride away. Some of it is too expensive (looking at you Hamilton) but many companies have programs for discounted tickets for artists, or those under 35. There’s also TDF and play-by-play giving you more affordable options as well.Even more critically than the work being shown, there are also ways for you to engage with next level professionals through classes, workshops, talkbacks, seminars, Q &amp; A’s, all of which serve to educate you as you grow in your own work.Opportunity: Currently in New York there are over 50 Television shows filming and 8 feature films, the latter of which is a bit disappointing. However those numbers along with the numerous theater companies most likely give you more professional opportunities than a smaller market could.With a larger market you’re also more likely to find casting directors, producers, and filmmakers, etc. who you like and who like you.Collaborators: I’ve saved arguably the most important for last. The people who you collaborate with are going to be the people who influence your work and growth as an artist more than any other component. It’s the playing with great tennis players theory again, only instead of competing with them you’re building on one another’s talents and gifts to create something bigger than any one of you. The single biggest resource we have in New York is in one another, and that’s an opportunity that’s too good to miss.