Thoughts on Being an “Artist”All my life I’ve been artistic. All my life I’ve never been an Artist.Artists, to me, where these poor bohemian hippies always talking about your inner smile and aligning your chakra and making useless crap that no one likes or needs in their life. Admittedly I grew up in a pretty culture-less redneck small town in the middle of nowhere, but our galleries were filled with bizarre cardboard sculptures and generally random looking generations of noise made physical. The museum tours even of the big cities as part of our school curriculum were filled with a teacher saying “look kids, this is an art!” and we’d all be confused and bored until we discovered the museum also had cool dinosaur bone displays. A lot of my anti-art sentiment was because of my growing minimalist sentiment which was that having trinkets and tchotchke on your shelves or hung on your wall was just visual clutter.But I drew. I’ve always drawn. Then I painted. Then I taught myself Photoshop and 3D modelling and HTML and photography and video and at age 16 nailed an interim web designer position at a local studio in the summers between high school semesters. Three summers, in fact. At the time I also had school where I did 4/3 of the allowable digital design semesters and a part time job at Sears and a paper route at 5:45 am every morning. They call this, I believe, hustle. I was very well paid for a young lad, working up to be a professional graphic designer.But I was never an artist.See, websites were concrete: they had a goal and a vision and objectively succeeded or failed to be good. This was design, this was using artistic mediums to solve a problem. This was real as compared to the hand-wavey artsy fartsy subjective nature of just making things you felt in your heart. I moved away and went to school for mechanical design because even web started feeling too hand-wavey. Any job that can be overrided by your client’s wife’s sister who was an interior decorator once and insisted things be a certain colour must be pretty subjective and soft. This was engineering. This was design that kept people from dying. These parts are this shape because of science and manufacturing and material physics. They were this colour because the injection molding plastics were shot as a set and if your client wanted a different colour that’d be another $40k to do another production run shooting a different plastic bead. It wasn’t subjective, there was real world decisions behind every speck of the outcome.I still love factories. Probably always will. Still wander through craft shows and marvel at the hand-made goods while simultaneously thinking “why don’t they just get a factory in China to make these for pennies each? It’d be so easy, we could do this and this and set up that…” because at heart, I just love efficiency and mass manufacturing benefits.But the pendulum swings.I was describing to a friend how I just desired to have creative control over useless stuff sometimes too. Make a comic book, direct a movie, build a motorcycle with my two hands. Those objects, as a result of being done by me, would exist in the same sort of universe, the same sort of Brennan style. How I didn’t want to work up the corporate ladder and become a manager of designers but just stay front-lines forever. Keep making, keep building stuff, keep my hands greasy and be commissioned not as a nameless designer who can fit into any designer role but as Brennan, the guy you call when you need this or that style made, because he was the guy who did that. There’s lots of rockstars, but there’s only one Mick Jagger. There’s only one me.He suggested that sounded a lot like an artist.Crap.It’s fascinating how different the books are for artists and designers in business. I still find the whole art world basically insufferable. I will never understand the supposed greats. Our engineering school was next to the art college and we’d wander the halls and laugh at the bizarre crap. The story goes that a vase smashed on the floor and the janitors left it for weeks because they weren’t sure if it was intentionally art or an actual accident. That’s the sort of thing that freaks me out, that’s the sort of uselessness I dislike. The old jokes: “what does a bachelor of arts say? ‘would you like fries with that?’” and the weird kids in my art classes over the years who did sort of end up like that.What I’m trying to say is, I have no idea how to reconcile all of this stuff.On one hand I’ve read dozens if not hundreds of financial books over the years, on entrepreneurship and design and startups and development and hardware engineering, on investment and tax law and boring white collar “this sounds like a Patrick Bateman monologue” type lifestyle gurus. On the other, I find most of those business types far too stuffy and structured, just building for money instead of building to make the product that they’d love to see real.That last sentence is damning for me. That’s the crap I want to do, because there’s so much inside me wanting to be made, wanting to get out. But isn’t that identical to making the thing that’s “in your heart”? Isn’t that the hand-wavey nonsense I dislike?And maybe it all collapses down to something like “I AM an artist, but my art is totally not what your art is, or, what the general conception of what art is supposed to be”Which then begs to ask “am I merely afraid of calling myself that because of what other people would think or assume about me?” because in that case I have two answers: “screw them, I don’t care what they think” and “yeah, that’s hauntingly close, and I want to hide behind the word designer because I think it sounds more intelligent and productive, because I personally judge artists very aggressively”And maybe that’s the root of this whole thing — that I look down on artists. I’m afraid to call myself that because in my head it means lowering myself to that. In my head artists are still the people on the fifth page of the newspaper photographed with some hideous abstract statue that’s supposed to be a metaphor for the Jungian psychology of modern society in an era where cell phone interconnectivity has overcome primal social connections and all I see is some papier mâché and wax crayons melted over it with a heat gun. It’s not some higher abstraction of thought, it’s a fire hazard left under some hot gallery lights for a few weeks.So we’re left with the same thoughts. We’re just left with ‘I can be an artist and that’s just not my style of art’Maybe, maybe that’s just how it is.