Steal Like An Artist to Get Some Better IdeasWe all have some pre-defined notions and doubts when it comes to stealing ideas.“Is it right to take someone else’s idea for our own good?”It’s an arguable topic.However if you read about some of the most creative people in the world, you’ll realise that they all have been secret experts at stealing.Even the revered scientist Albert Einstein used to steal ideas from various sources.But before you think that all you need to do is go online, browse a hundred websites and expect some mind-boggling ideas to land on your table, you’re mistaken. That’s why even in the digital age, it’s crucial to have the right approach towards creativity.Austin Kleon talks about this new way of approaching creativity — which even though many people have been following in the past — it remains a secret that many don’t know about. So to share that with everyone he wrote: Steal Like An Artist. The core idea of this book is that you are a mash up of what you let into your life, and anyone can be creative if they surround themselves with the right influences. Then just play nice and work hard, as Austin explains.Check out the book trailer:Though many people have talked on the subject of creativity before, this man’s explanation is extremely crisp — no lengthy research studies, no long-winding paragraphs on its history — just a simple, honest and practical version of how he sees creativity, and how best we can cultivate it into our lifestyles.In the book he’s mentioned 10 things he wished he’d heard as a young creator.1. Steal like an artist. 2. Don’t wait until you know who you are to get started. 3. Write the book you want to read. 4. Use your hands. 5. Side projects and hobbies are important. 6. The secret: do good work and share it with people. 7. Geography is no longer our master. 8. Be nice. (The world is a small town.) 9. Be boring. (It’s the only way to get work done.) 10. Creativity is subtraction.Austin Kleon likes to describe himself as ‘a writer who draws’. He believes that in the digital age, it’s important for every individual to know their strengths so that they can brand them and share them with people.He does the same.He’s known for his signature style in which he presents his thoughts to the world.Take a look:One might argue that if people started *stealing* ideas from everywhere, then originality would go for a toss. But if you try finding out how great ideas around the world came into being, you’ll realise that most of them have been inspired by something that was done earlier. People just added their own spin to it and created something new from it. Austin strongly believes in this approach of creativity. It’s essential therefore, to have a keen eye on the events that are happening around us — that way we can have our own take on it.So stealing essentially, doesn’t have a scientific formula for creativity, it’s an art of finding your own inspiration.