There are more Black artists making awful Black music than there are white artists making it.I’m not basing my idea of who can or can’t contribute to hip-hop on race, but on intent and execution.I’ve been thinking for months about how to approach this subject that’s been eating at me, and I finally had to break down and just get it out there. In this time of think-pieces and media outlets profiting from outrage, I’ve seen many situations where white hip-hop artists are called into question for why they make the music they make and asked a litany of interrogative questions, as if the interrogator is dangling an actual pass of sorts which will then allow them free reign inside of hip-hop. I’ve seen white journalists who have opinions that differ from their critics have their hip-hop cred called into question and be accused of just trying to profit off of the culture.The problem there is… a bouncer can’t really expect to enforce a dress code too strictly when there are people inside the club with sweats and flip-flops on. Our “house,” if you will, is a mess, and it isn’t something we can blame on white people… the fans or the artists.We were giving country to cartoonish walking rapper-stereotypes long before Riff Raff showed up… and we still are… and there’s truly only one Riff Raff. If anything, the Black ones present more of a problem if we’re going to talk about race, but it seems the gatekeepers want to discuss the rape of the culture and the suffering art, so let’s do that.The straw that broke the camel’s back and made me get some thoughts out on this topic was a recent series of J. Cole lines from a song called “Fire Squad,” where he takes the time to call out the names of some popular white artists:I was astounded at the fact that people found these statements admirable or deep in any way. Then again, these are the same folks who thought Yeezus was a coup for Black awareness, so it isn’t that surprising. In terms of hip-hop appreciation, let’s be real… the Grammys haven’t been shit in years. Some of the most unimportant records of the year have been getting Grammy nods for at least 15 years, so cut it out. No one is shocked. In addition, Iggy Azalea is putting out the same rap-lite schlock that nominee Drake is, and yet I’m supposed to be upset only at Iggy’s output because half of Drake is Black? This makes no sense. People have been watering down hip-hop long before Iggy Azalea and Macklemore came along.Black people are accustomed to being trendsetters, but we also need to own it when the trend we set isn’t good or we’re contributing to ruining a good thing, as opposed to blaming whites for simply picking up where we leave off. When hip-hop artists started going out of their way to appeal to audiences who weren’t hip-hop fans, it opened the door for what we have now, which is people rapping over tracks that bear the vaguest of resemblances to hip-hop music. Sampling is a lost art. Boom-bap is a thing of the past, and you’re considered a dinosaur if you even expect to hear it or lament its absence.Quite simply, let’s be really real with ourselves.There are also more non-rapping Black individuals contributing to the outright debasement of hip-hop culture than people seem to be willing to point out. Mona Scott, creator of the embarrassment known as the Love &amp; Hip-Hop franchise, is a Black woman. The owner of WorldStarHipHop is a Black guy. And yet I see more anger directed at the white guys behind RapGenius.com, a lyrics search engine, than I do at either of those aforementioned Black projects, which both attach the name of the culture to something incredibly ugly and destructive.If you want to be mad about the direction the culture is going in, then by all means, do so. I appreciate the passion. It’s needed. All change isn’t evolution. Someone has to be able to say this shit is not hip-hop. However, if you’re going to get mad about the direction our culture is going in, realize that the art comes first, regardless of who is making it. If we are accepting of less than hip-hop is capable of creating, then that’s a bed we made for ourselves. We let Black artists create absolute shite for years but gag when it’s served on a white spoon. That doesn’t make sense. A lot of really informed people who are contributing positively to the culture out here are not Black and to ignore the fact that non-Blacks have contributed to the culture over the course of history is just not knowing your history.While J. Cole tries to bring up Elvis as a comparison, let’s be clear about the problem with Elvis… or rather the problem people think they have with Elvis, which is largely based on two things:Now, while Iggy Azalea’s accent switch when she’s in her “rapper mode” is rather unsettling, it isn’t anything I’m willing to get upset over. I’m not willing to own her feigned hood-rat dialect as something that is an appropriation of my race or culture. It’s just not definitive of anything I hold dear.That being said, the problem I see with Iggy Azalea isn’t her being white and making bad music; it’s her making bad music. And the fact that it’s selling as rap or hip-hop when it’s really bordering on pop. Same thing with Macklemore. But also the same issue I would have with Drake. But this is all personal opinion and preference.Are you making hip-hop for hip-hop fans and everyone else who might like it? Or are you making it for everyone else and fuck the hip-hop fans? Are there any remnants of actual hip-hop sounds in your music or are you just saying catchy shit in a rappish cadence over an R&amp;B or synth-heavy alternative track?Hip-hop is amazing in that it’s given a lot of people a voice all over the globe. When west coast rap emerged, Californians like me were happy someone was finally around to tell our stories over tracks that flowed with our lifestyles seamlessly. Sure, there were Black people over there rapping, but they weren’t speaking our same language or making music that was suited for the west coast car culture. I’m sure people of other races feel the same way when someone comes along who looks like them and/or comes from a similar background. Taking that away or making people feel unwelcome to contribute or speak their mind based on the color of their skin is wack, to make it plain, and not what the culture was founded on.If you want to do something positive for hip-hop, call all rappers to task for making music that doesn’t represent the culture, not just the ones who are white. The idea of people being “guests” in hip-hop after all this time is absurd and I’ve heard terrible rap opinions from Black people as well as white people. The truly informed and invested are few and far between and are to be cherished when you come across them, regardless of their race.This hasn’t been a case in defense of Iggy Azalea or Macklemore or anyone else. It’s a case for expecting better hip-hop from everyone, not just people who don’t fit the mold racially. We’ve grown as a culture and with that, people from all walks have become consumers and creators of the sound. It was bound to happen.The point is that we’ve been supporting disposable music for well over a decade in mainstream hip-hop, so it’s absurd to now point the finger at white artists for winning awards and getting attention for following suit. Something that isn’t really hip-hop isn’t an appropriation of hip-hop culture, it’s a perversion of it and that perversion isn’t being done only by white people. Take some ownership. We’ve all got an obligation to expect more out of hip-hop.If you enjoyed reading this, please click “Recommend” below.This will help to share the story with others.Shaka Shaw is a freelance online music journalist and creator of Front-Free.com.