What Does It Take To Be A Yoga Teacher?What does it take to be a yoga teacher? Becoming a yoga teacher is not as dependent on your skills in class as you may think. While you might not be the most flexible person around, it is a teacher’s ability to engage their students that creates the foundation in which they can base the rest of their teaching style. If you have been practicing yoga for a while and aspire to teach, then you can begin by doing a yoga alliance certified 200 hour yoga teacher training.Many yoga teachers get their start, with the idea of becoming a better student. Like they say you’re your life as a teacher begins the day you realize you’re always a learner. While self-doubt can creep into one’s mind, it has very little place in a classroom setting. Whether its yoga or a totally different subject altogether, a self-assured teacher is always going to be able to get more out of their students.Another important quality for yoga teachers to have is the ability to speak in public. Public speaking is one of the most crucial aspects of relating to students and getting important points across. If you find yourself struggling to let go of your public speaking fears, then yoga teaching may not be for you.In order to become a great yoga teacher, you must also embrace your own unique teaching style and not worry about trying to emulate those who came before you. When you are being yourself, it is much easier to put stage fright off to the side and focus on what is truly important: enriching the lives of your students and in the process your own.Finding your own voice and knowing how to communicate with your students makes for a much better learning environment. The impulse to mimic the instructor who taught you will be strong, but you must power through this urge. It is great to imbibe what you learn from others into your own practice but you must listen to your inner spirit and treat the experience as if it were your own, not an extension of theirs.Most of all, it is best to keep your teaching style simple and fun. Trust the lessons you have learned from your instructor and the lessons you learned during the training process to become a teacher. Allow yourself to be an open book and incorporate bits and pieces of these styles into your own, so that you can become the very best version of yourself.The best yoga teachers exist in a place of zero judgement. They have strong levels of compassion and openness, plus the ability to connect with their students on a deeper level. At its core, yoga is a very intimate exercise, one that requires a certain level of connection between teacher and student.What does it take to be a yoga teacher? Most importantly it will take the understanding that Yoga teaching is not about you, it is about providing the best option for your students. Being completely available and open to what is unfolding in front of you is what separates the great yoga teachers from the rest of the pack.Even if you are not the star pupil of your yoga class, you just may have what it takes to be a yoga teacher. Take the next step and see how it can change your life. One of the steps you can take is on embarking on a trans formative journey with a 200 Hour Yoga Teacher Training in Goa.