Teachers: tell them they’re good (even if they’re not)It’s not about denying weaknesses…I was on a trip to Boston this week. As a french entrepreneur and MIT Innovator under 35, I had the chance to be invited to visit the MIT and meet entrepreneurs in Boston.During a lunch with the french community there, I remember that one story struck me. It was from a dad, who brought his family to the US years ago. His daughters had been studying in french schools and now they were in a completely different environment.He remembers seeing an american teacher struggling to give a comment to one of her young students.– Why do you have an issue commenting this copy? he asked.– This student did not understand the assignment at all. I’m having a hard time figuring out something nice to say for what she did.This was a surprising answer for him. He was used to be told what’s wrong, not what’s good. What you have to do better, not what you already do well.Sure, not all teachers in France are acting this way with their students. But on a cultural level, there is no doubt that we’re used to be told where we’ve been wrong first.I believe that these small details, applied at the scale of an entire education system, make a huge difference in the end. Students feel stronger. They take more risks. Because they take more risks, they fail more often. And because they fail often, they learn more.No wonder why so many french students do not raise hands to ask a question or answer to the teacher: they are afraid to be wrong. They are afraid to look stupid.…it’s about empowering strengths.I know what some of you might be thinking:That’s true. You have to tell them where they can improve.But you’re missing the point in all of this: it’s about creating the right mindset. A mindset where people feel good about themselves, where they feel free to try things. Because this is one of the best ways I know to help people learn.I’m not implying that the american education system is superior to the french one or whatever. I hear they have their issues to. But I do recognize that this mindset makes a great difference in the end and I’d rather see our children learn with a positive-first mindset than a negative-first one.Oh, and remember that teacher struggling to give a nice comment to this girl who did not understand the assignment at all? This is what she finally decided to put: