The Teacher Learns the MostSpace is a technology.Prepare to respond creatively, not just deliver information.Care for the person as much as the topic itself.Tell and show, beautifully.Manage debates like a judge.Find balance between structure and flexibility.Have fun.At the time, I was just trying to be the best teacher I could be . It was my dream job and it was fun. Looking back, I’m surprised at how much of that experience has been directly useful for entrepreneurship. I almost think that teaching classes should be prerequisite for managing any company. I’m not referring to product development skills specifically, but rather those behavioral patterns which allow craftsmen to thrive and/or cause markets to respond.Here are some of those realizations which I developed back then, and still mindful of today:Physical space has the power to shape the way we think and behave. The classroom is no exception. Over time, I learned to arrange desks, easels, walls and props into specific configurations prior to each class. Changes to classroom layout got the student’s attention and helped to facilitate performing certain operations after the lecture. The use of space always attempted to reinforce the type of communication that was happening. To this day, I still believe CEO should be part interior designer. Here is a short post about designing our current office.Teaching is much more than information delivery. The real teaching happens when students ask a question or respond in some way. As a teacher, I tried to have the content so deeply internalized that I could have a creative response to any person on the spot. The few times I slipped, students could feel my preparation was thin and skeptically withdrew. Customers are like students, they want you to enrich their lives and they have a good antennae for bullshit. So I really prepare for each conversation, and then listen. The creative responses happen effortlessly when I have actually heard and understand their situation.I don’t mean this in a sentimental way. Rather, it’s important to constantly be aware of a student’s point of view, needs, talents, and limitations. Lessons are most powerful when they are bespoke. If you care too much about the purity of the subject, you can miss the student. The goal is not teaching, but rather, for learning to happen. When talking with customers, I try to use their vocabulary and be sensitive to their needs while helping them. I try to answer questions as I would for my own family. If I realize that our product is not the right fit for them, I say that and point out some other options.I learned that visualizing concepts beautifully had a transformative impact on the class. Pure information is abstract and hard to absorb. So, I began to illustrate wall-sized geometric forms that helped to clarify, or embody, the content of the lecture as it was happening. I didn’t have to make a big leap, because it was a drawing class after all. However, this required real preparation on my part, which led to breakthroughs in my own understanding and ability to draw more beautifully. The efficacy of beauty is well known, but often not understood within business. You can’t put lipstick on a pig. Great visuals require a deep understanding of concepts and a significant investment of time &amp; energy. This zeal comes from a company’s culture, not some directive.When debates erupted in the classroom, it was a good sign because it meant that students were engaged and cared about what they were doing. Rather than crushing that enthusiasm with “the answer,” I learned to treat the situation more like a courtroom which I presided over. The judge doesn’t exercise their opinion, they make sure that everyone else gets their opinion heard in a fair way, helps to develop the conversation, and blocks anything unhelpful. At our company, I try to be that judge during internal debates (although not always successfully).Having a clear structure (schedule, rules, lesson plans, breaks, etc) was critical for establishing momentum. Students liked knowing there was a plan and it helped to develop trust. However, too much structure precludes creativity, serendipity, and productivity. A small company needs some structure for all the same reasons, but also the flexibility to adapt and experiment. Finding the right balance between structure and flexibility is something that needs to be constantly optimized based on the skill level and size of the company.I loved the act of teaching, the subject matter, and all the students. I was genuinely happy to be in the classroom, which I’m sure students could perceive. Fun was the key ingredient. If you’re not having fun, it’s likely you are bringing others down and might not be good at your job. When something is fun, we become proactive and creative in ways that are key to the lifeblood of any enterprise.The classroom was a world that I could re-invent from scratch each time. I believe that sense of freedom and creativity is critical for business as well. You can literally create the world. This begins with refusing to accept policies or procedures that don’t make sense. It means understanding that limits are often imaginary. Resourcefulness can make up for lack of resources. It requires that we always be looking for how to improve the system and follow wherever those improvements lead. Create the world you want to live within.When every part of a company’s activity is thoughtfully constructed, the friction disappears and it feels like levitation.