By Molly RobbinsThe “Twitter-verse” has dramatically altered how 236 million social media users communicate, vent, consume real-time news, raise awareness of special causes, and — of course — pass on plenty of useless information.Twitter has been called a “digital soapbox” for politicians, and can create almost instantaneous demand for a new product. It has also been used, unfortunately, to damage reputations and self-esteem.Educators are using the platform to share resources, interact with peers, and advocate for policy changes. Some of us are integrating Twitter tips into our lesson plans. We might follow large entities like publishers or national organizations, big names who are big thinkers, or small names who are big thinkers. But I make sure to tell my students and my colleagues, “Twitter is only as good as the people you follow, so follow smartly.”A 2014 University of Southern California survey of Twitter-using educators showed that 77 percent of respondents used the tool to stay informed, while 66 percent share resources in their Tweets.Perhaps the richest educator-led use of Twitter occurs every Tuesday, when we convene under the hashtag #EdChat. This ongoing online debate about major topics in education began out of a conversation between three educators: Tom Whitby, Shelly Sanchez, and Steve Anderson. They recognized a need for teachers to collaborate about educational issues, find resources to help us improve our craft, and have a space to nudge one another’s thinking.They were right. According to Keyhole, which tracks social media activity, #EdChat reaches two million users each week. There are also a variety of popular specialty areas, like subject matter-focused and state-level education Twitter chats.Many educators use the social media platform for ideas and unexpected collaborations. For instance, my school’s technology liaison is the only person within our walls with her job. It is imperative that she keep up-to-date with educational technology trends. To do so, she has built a strong Twitter community of counterparts in other schools across the country and reaches out to them periodically.Similarly, I had a question last week about how to use OneNote in my classroom. I had never used the program and needed a quick introduction. I sent a tweet to my community asking for advice on how to use it in school applications. I received no fewer than 30 tweets within the span of just a couple of hours. I received classroom ideas, helpful websites, people to contact, and even a link to a YouTube how-to video. I got all the information — and then some! — I needed in the time it takes to watch a movie.In the classes I teach, I use hashtags to help students collaborate and connect with one another. My favorite application forces students to write a concise, compelling thesis statement in no more than 140 characters. In order to teach this, we look at Twitter headlines from various news services to help them see how these work to guide an argument — a tip I learned from teachers around the country. My students love it because I use a technology they are familiar with.But remember: Twitter is only as good as the people you follow, so follow smartly.Illustration by Marina MuunBright is made possible by funding from the New Venture Fund, and is supported by The Bill &amp; Melinda Gates Foundation.