My first web siteMy first articleMy first paid journalism jobNote: if you find some english mistakes, just let me know in the comments. This post is part of my 30-day challenge “I’m Italian, so I don’t speak English”.That day I was superhappy. I knew we had to write a fairytale at school: the best ones would be published on the local newspaper’s section dedicated to elementary school. I was thrilled. I loved writing. I used to fill thousands of secret diaries with stories, poetries, tales and philosophical thoughts.I was ready and I started writing. I was super confident my fairytale would be chosen for the newspaper. I started dreaming about the moment when I would come back home announcing this great news to my parents. After two days, my teacher told us which stories would be published on the local newspaper. I couldn’t wait to hear my name, but something went wrong. My name wasn’t among the ones she named.I was embarrassed and angry with myself. I was ashamed of my ambitions. I was uncomfortable with my low mark. And of course: I didn’t want to tell it to my demanding parents.I came back home and I started writing in my secret diary what had happened to me. Then I wrote a story and another and another one. I was too shy to read these stories to anybody so I kept them for myself.He built a website for me. It was called “La cameretta di Annabella” and he told me I could use the Internet to get in touch with everybody in the world. I could have pen friends and I could publish my stories without anybody’s permission. Only one threcommendation: I should use Annabella as nickname on the web so nobody could hurt me in the real life.I was very enthusiastic! I couldn’t believe I could finally publish whatever I wanted. It was a magic world for me. I got in touch with some little girls from England, from Tuscany, from the South of Italy, because they read my stories. It was amazing for me!Year after year I kept writing. Then I opened a myspace blog, then a blog on Il Cannocchiale and blogger.it. I was totally fascinated by the opportunities the web offered me to write.I was 15 years old and I was bored during the hot summer holidays. At that time I was passionate about politics so I wrote a three-page reportage about new fascisms in Italy. I studied several political parties and I published my post on my private blog. One of my best friends told me I should spread the voice of what I wrote and we started thinking how.The answer arrived one day at school. One of the local newspapers was looking for high-school students for the school insert. (Note: it was the same newspaper where my fairytale wasn’t published years before).It was my solution. I joined the editorial staff and I published my first article on the press. It was a reportage about violence against women in Friuli-Venezia Giulia, my region. I was super proud they gave me half of the first page of the insert. I wanted to cry, to laugh and to jump!Also my teacher called me because she read my signature at the end of the article. (In your face, prof!)I was part of the teenage editorial staff for three years. We participated in international journalism festivals in Perugia and Ferrara and we celebrated the 10th anniversary of the insert together.During my time at University, I also joined several editorial staff and I wrote for 5 different magazines and volunteered as blogger for some local events.After graduation, I moved to Malta for my gap year and I decided to open another blog. It was called “FacciAMO gli Italiani” and was a collection of positive stories of young Italian people who were doing something to change the Italian situation.He told me: “I like your project, I’m doing something similar. Let’s do it together: I’m looking for an Assistant Editor for the magazine I’m the Editor of”. I didn’t believe that it was happening to me. “Are you serious?” Yes, he was.I moved to Rome after two weeks and I got my first paid job in the field of journalism. It seemed that it was just a dream, not real life. But it wasn’t a dream.My teacher called me again when she learned I was working there. She was happy and proud. And I was adult enough to thank her for having thaught me how to write correctly in Italian. If she had published my fairytale, I would never start writing with such passion. Thanks prof!