To be brief, I dropped out last November and decided to stay at home for an year to learn and do things I love. My education swung to and fro from moral philosophy, understanding modern world through science fiction, solving problems through design thinking to web development and design of computer programs.This December I joined Airwoot, a real-time social media customer support startup as a Front End Engineer.The year spent in solitude changed me as a person and new dreams were born. No effort can capture the essence and the wisdom generated while living the life of a recluse. But I will mention some ideas I came across during the year and then tried my best to make them an essential part of my living.I don’t know what Hofstadter exactly meant by this. I never read any of his work, I just picked up the quote.But as a programmer, I identify that its much frugal to know about the “class” of things rather than study about specific instances of them.As a web developer, I have to deal with a lot frameworks and libraries, so, its always better to study the problem a particular code is trying to solve before getting all bothered by how the code is solving it and how to use it.We can plan a lot and even execute it for some days, but to have a dream and to attain your goals, you got to execute your plans, day after day, month after month. And this, my friend, is an ultimate challenge for you mind when you are just getting started.Humans are pretty good at coming up with excuses and labelling exceptional circumstances. Well, consistency doesn’t recognise exceptions.If you are consistent, you can trust your plans on paper and operate at the next level of productivity.As an aside, I never read any self-help book. All these are just plain common sense and a little bit of introspection can work wonders.Again, I can situate this idea in the context of web development and building software. We are constantly presented with the opportunity to build upon works done by other good folks. And in most cases you really need it.Its pertinent in our line of work not to reinvent the wheel.But this inculcates in us the habit of ‘SHIP IT ASAP’.So, when at places we need to understand the details, we abstain from spending time in our preparation for the task. We assume the time spent in preparation is superfluous.There is a great revelation to knowing preparation can better your productivity in the long term.Even before getting started with web development, I faced two defeats — the monstrosity of what I had to learn and the dynamic nature of web development. And I guess this applies to everything you are getting started at.The only sanity proof solution is to concentrate on your task at hand, finish it and then proceed to next.This was the singular idea that got me started on my journey.I started believing in it before the dropout, I believed it through out this year in solitude and I will always believe it.Not worrying about what’s in store for the future lets you give your best shot at the present. And if you learn to always give your best shot at the present, I would like to believe you are half way there.