The TeacherThe OpportunityThe SolutionThe Design JourneyWisdomBy Molly McMahonPia Awal has been teaching for 18 years and was born to be a teacher. Growing up, she re-imagined her bedroom as a classroom, with blackboard and endless stuffed animals as students, and even recruited her little sister as her first dedicated pupil.“Teaching is what I always thought I would do.”Currently, she is a Learning Specialist at Riverdale Country Day School, and works with small groups of students from 1st through 3rd grade on both reading and math. When talking about what it means to be a learning specialist, she shared, “We often get caught between being a teacher and administrator…because we are always tracking students who are struggling socially and emotionally and provide support and recommendations to their teachers.”Three years ago, after participating in a design thinking workshop, she and her fellow learning research team decided to tackle the challenge of How might we create a system to address children’s social and emotional struggles as school community.The system they designed has transformed Riverdale by providing a whole child approach to supporting struggling students and their teachers. The solutions are simple. They designed a tool — an intake form built on Google docs — and a process — data that is collected guides the learning research team’s weekly and quarterly meetings. It has opened up a dialogue, so that tracking is not just about data, it’s a student story that can be shared, consulted on, and followed by others.Pia and the learning research team began by recruiting other enthusiastic teachers and then narrowing to a challenge question they could rally behind. They came up with: How might we address children’s social and emotional struggles as school community? Then, they took several months to design together.At the end, they presented to faculty and administrators. It took over the summer and into the next year before the system was finally approved. Pia and the learning research team weathered the ups and downs of creating something new and convincing the school to try it by partnering with others. “It definitely was hard, and we couldn’t have done it without the support of some really amazing teachers.”So, as you embark on your design own design journey, carry this wisdom from Pia…