The Myth of the Hero Teacher: A Counter-NarrativeThere’s been much hoopla over the last week regarding the New York Times article “The Myth of the Hero Teacher” about Ed Boland’s memoir The Battle for Room 314: My Year of Hope and Despair in a New York City High School, which recounts countless episodes of the “thugs” who tortured him, forcing him to cry in the bathroom like a little girl. Boland blames his failure as a teacher on inadequate training and his students’ misbehavior on the poverty that he believes is insurmountable.Columbia Professor Christopher Emdin (whose upcoming book For White Folks Who Teach in the Hood…and the Rest of Y’all Too: Reality Pedagogy and Urban Education I cannot wait to read) writes on his Facebook page:“Boland does a phenomenal job at painting urban youth of color as irreparably damaged and unable to be saved while reinforcing a newly emerging perverse racism wrapped in progressivism and left-leaning language and politics. He manages to pull off this amazing feat while self aggrandizing and instilling a loathing of the most vulnerable young people.”While I wouldn’t use language quite as strong, I do believe there is bigotry in blaming everything on poverty and in not holding students and parents accountable for their failures. Inner city kids aren’t irreparably damaged and neither are their parents. They face adversities and sometimes make bad choices — let them own up to it. Do not take away agency from people.Furthermore, better training would not have helped Boland. That’s because, to him, teaching is a selfish endeavor, as is evidenced in the last line of the Times article in which he talks about a gifted student who now bags groceries part-time at a supermarket and is being sued by her college for having overstayed her terms at a dorm:“That’s supposed to be my success story,” he cries.When I first started teaching, I also made it about me, but a mentor told me that it wasn’t about me and that I should honor each student’s narrative. That was wise advice.Additionally, better training wouldn’t have helped Boland because you can’t teach common sense. The idea that someone can tell you how to take a cell-phone out of a teenager’s hand is absurd. You just have to know how to do it. “That teacher got no swag,” my students would’ve said about Boland.Finally, there ARE heroic teachers in inner city schools.If heroic teachers didn’t exist, neither would students who are graduating and going to college, the first in their families to do so. If heroic teachers didn’t exist, neither would students who are working, the first in their families to not have to depend on public assistance.If heroic teachers didn’t exist, you wouldn’t have a situation like the one I witnessed in which a smart student was purposely failing so that he wouldn’t have to graduate — because he didn’t want to leave his teachers — the only stabilizing forces in his life.Not too long ago, I wrote about my experiences teaching, which were very different from Boland’s. I’m linking to that article in The Atlantic. There is a hero in this story and it isn’t who you think it is. (And if it were up to me, I would retitle the essay The Master and Her Apprentice.)If you like what you’ve read, be sure to hit the recommend button, to pass this story on to your followers. As always, consider following The Synapse for more authentic voices in education!