Your PoliSci Teacher Was Wrong, People Aren’t Inherently Evil.Private Enterprise In the 19th Century.What Makes You Feel Safe?Government Is Not the Most Effective At Keeping Us Safe.If you regularly watch the news or follow current events you probably have the impression that evil is all around us. But people aren’t naturally evil. There are people out there that can be a dangerous threat to society but that is not a representation of your average person. We see the very worst of humanity in the media. When something terrible happens like someone walks into a school and bombs the place, we hear about it. These incidents are fairly few and far between but it’s difficult to really see that with how the stories are hyped up.There is a very common opposition to a lot of my writing. I hear at least once a week that the private enterprise can’t handle all the maniacs in the world and that’s why we need a centralized government bureaucracy. The assumption is that the government is there to protect us.I don’t believe people are inherently evil. I believe most people are good and just want to live a happy life with others around them. Fortunately for us, when someone wants what is best for themselves, that tends to be what is best for others. People want to feel protected and safe, because of this they have an incentive to make others feel the same way.A very good example of this is the gold rush during the 19th century. There were all different types of people from different races and cultures rushing out west to California in search of gold. People from all over the country, even as far as China, all headed to one place. These people, hungry for gold, didn’t plan to stay in California very long. Their plan was to get the gold and get out. None of these people knew each other, so they didn’t have any kind of cultural comradery to build off of. Of course, there was also the common element of greed.All these pieces combined seem to imply that this rush for gold would be a bloodbath. This was not the case. At the time, there was no government regulation of this area at all. The free market was allowed to work naturally. When people sensed this potential danger, they created clubs in the different areas and groups. The reason for these clubs was to decide on a certain set of guidelines and rules for how society should function. The fate of someone who broke the rules was also included in these.I hear so often that we need a police state to control all the crazy and dangerous people. I don’t believe most people are a threat to society. Whether they would want to do harm to others or not, they have an incentive to be a productive and positive member in society.But let’s say this entire time you’ve been rolling your eyes. You don’t buy it. You believe a large portion of the population is inherently evil and without government protection, we would all be shot or stabbed tomorrow.So say 2% of people are really out to get you. Is the state the most effective at stopping crime? It’s not. Have you ever tried filling out a police report?Over the past 50 years, crime has steadily decreased but no one seems to understand why. There have been hundreds of studies on the subject. No one has the answer because there is no indisputable statistic that proves one theory correct. It comes down to the fact that technology has developed. The free market is constantly working to make the world more secure.If you are skeptical, ask yourself what you do to feel safe. You lock your windows, you lock your car, you set a security alarm, or you buy a gun and holster that can be concealed in your waistband. Would you ever intentionally leave your car unlocked in a dangerous part of town with your wallet in the shotgun seat? Would you think it might be stolen but that it would be alright because the police are there to protect justice?Private enterprise is solely responsible for making our lives safer. There is a demand for safety. It’s one of the most fundamental human desires. Like everything else, when there is demand, there is a hungry entrepreneur who sees an opportunity.Security comes from things like locks on doors, security cameras, private guards, or mini cans of pepper spray. Did you know that now there’s a doorbell that sends you a live feed of whoever just rang the bell right to your iPhone? Incredible. That’s what is making the world safer. It’s not cops and jails.About a year and a half ago when the Ferguson riots took place, nearly every business within a two-mile range of the St. Louis suburb had to board up to avoid looting. A dozen were burned to the ground. Citizens took it upon themselves to guard a certain store that stayed open throughout the entire period of riots. Meanwhile, the police sat in their armored trucks.These people weren’t being paid for their service. They just had an incentive to keep the business they had been going to for their entire lives safe. This is a beautiful example of private enterprise providing security even in the midst of chaos.Again, I don’t believe people are naturally evil. The world is a relatively safe place full of people wanting the best for themselves. When people want the best for themselves, that tends to be the best for all of society. But there are some dangerous people out there, you can’t deny that completely. But I am still always bewildered by this assumption that a government entity is necessary to protect us. Just look around you. What makes you feel safer? If you are anything like me, it’s not the cop down the street.Originally published at nicktucker.me on January 21, 2016.