It is impossible to study teaching without running into violent emotion. I’m not talking about outbursts from students — I’m still in the introductory phase of my teacher education. Education sparks feelings in everyone, most of all in teachers. They are all looking for that golden goose that lays golden eggs of learning day in and day out. Every time someone thinks they’ve found the goose, the emotional weather forecast is storms.The early adapters jump on board blindly, preaching the gospel with joy. The suspicious traditionalists come out with sharp words of critique. The silent majority watch suspiciously to see the bloodbath. In teachers’ rooms and social media teachers can turn on each other viciously.As a teacher student, it is unsettling to hear the stories and see the Facebook discussions. With my borderline radical optimism towards things like learner agency, I might easily get cornered as the young, naïve teacher before I even get the chance to make my own mistakes and mature my teaching methods.The aggression towards the new and unknown is understandable. Among experienced teachers it must come from a strong professional identity built on certain methods and years of classroom work. Among teacher students it stems from the still vivid memory of what we did and didn’t like in schools and perhaps some work experience as a substitute teacher. We often armor our insecurity with brash opinions.But the whole point of the Finnish education system is in the independence of highly-educated teachers. Attacking the independence of our colleagues and future colleagues is against our own interests.The lectures I’ve attended during the past two weeks have emphasised that there are two intertwined approaches to didactics: descriptive and normative. The first refers to the scientific goal of describing what exists without judgement, the second to the aim of finding the best possible (or sometimes “correct”) way of doing something. I’ve stumbled into this dichotomy before in my studies, but then it has always been possible (if difficult) to separate between the two. In Pedagogical Studies, the connection between the two has the blessing of the scientific community.It’s slightly strange after a couple of years of institutional suspicion against normative art criticism, normative grammar and norms altogether.The great thing is, normative research has become more and more aware that there is no one true answer to what great teaching looks like. There are several ways to be a great teacher, though they have similar features like positivity and a good relationship with students. All teaching is based on a idea of what kind of people we want our children to grow up to be like. But this idea changes with time and differs culture to culture.The Finnish curriculum is vague because it recognises the nature of normative didactics. It spells out the values and aims we as a society want to focus on in education. It gives guidelines to what skills children should learn, but it leaves what children should learn up to local curriculums. In the end, each and every Finnish classroom that adheres to the current curriculum will look different, but they still share the same common values and objectives. The classrooms reflect the teacher — and hopefully the students — but they are all Finnish classrooms, just like we are all Finnish teachers and Finnish students.It is important to remember that there is solid research at the bottom of things. Normative didactics has it’s problems, but there is descriptive research that has a growing amount of empirical evidence on what learning is. Before we jump on our respective bandwagons, let’s find out what the road is like.I write this not only to give voice to my frustrations, but to remind myself to be kind as I continue on my journey. Most teachers I have met have been encouraging and considerate. If I ask for space and understanding for my own professional development, I need to give it to others. I return to Rainer Maria Rilke’s wisdom once again.Every person is different. Every teacher is different, every student is different, every group is different. Even every subject, every subject matter, every idea is different. Therefore, there is no one way to teach. There is just the struggle to find the methods that best suit you as a teacher; a variety from which you can choose the most appropriate for every classroom moment you find yourself in.It is important to remember that each and every teacher is in the same position. Sharing ideas and learning from others is essential, but telling others how they should teach is more often than not unwarranted, demeaning and unhelpful. Especially if you think they are wrong and no one asked for your opinion.Special thanks go to Tiina-Maria Päivänsalo for sparking this thought process.