HOW IT WORKSTHE BOOK FOR OCTOBERTHE READING SCHEDULEHOW TO PARTICIPATETWEET UPS &amp; MEET UPS— Most Likely to Succeed: Preparing Our Kids for the Innovation EraWith our very first Collaboration concluded, we wondered how we might enhance the community experience with additional opportunities to exchange and interact with each other. With that, we’re launching our first ever Guild Book Club, an early prototype, to discuss big ideas in the world of education with our most powerful source of innovators — you, educators!For each collaboration, we will select a book to read and discuss as a community. Each week, we’ll discuss a new set of questions. The discussions will take place right here on Medium, on Twitter, and in person at meet ups held throughout the month. We’ve created a reading schedule and a facilitator’s guide to help guide us along the way.Our next Collaboration, which kicks off October 1st, will focus on sparking curiosity among students. To build upon our exploration of this question, we’ll read Tony Wagner and Ted Dintersmith’s newest book: Most Likely to Succeed: Preparing our Kids For the Innovation Era.In Most Likely to Succeed, Wagner and Dintersmith call for a fundamental reimagining of education. They argue that our educational system no longer prepares our students for the world they are graduating into and note that our incremental changes focused on designing solutions to an obsolete system are useless and detrimental. If we want to produce adults that will be happy, thriving and informed (and curious!) citizens in the ‘innovation era’, we need to change our focus to cultivating core capacities such as curiosity, creativity, critical thinking, and collaboration in our students; and we need new approaches to teaching and assessing those skills. We hope that the arguments, research findings and insights presented in Most Likely to Succeed will help prompt us to think of deeper, more effective systems, tools and strategies to spark student curiosity.We will be hosting two Tweet ups and meet ups during the month of October, both of which will take place on:Join the conversation on Twitter, using the hashtags: #SparkCuriosity and #MLTSWe’ll also be hosting in-person meet ups around the country on those days — check out these tips on how to host your own local meet ups. Nothing formal, just a chance to get together with other educators in your area.Happy reading!