I have to brag on my friend. He’ll never do it himself because he’s not the type to toot his own horn or talk about the amazing things he does in his classroom outside of a very small, very tightly knit group of friends.He started his teaching career last fall. He and I went through the same teacher training program. We had some classes together. We got to know each other fairly well.He came to me time and again looking for new ideas for his classroom. I, being the student teacher that I was, took the opportunity to have a live guinea pig to try out some of my ideas and some things that I’d seen other teachers do.There was nothing I could throw at this guy that he would say “no” to. Not. One. Thing.Fearless. Some might even say wreckless (which is not a bad thing at all). Nothing would stop this guy from creating a classroom and a learning environment that his students would NEVER forget.Nothing would stop him from breaking every mold and preconception that people have about a first-year teacher. Nothing would keep him from being absolutely the best that he could be. An equal among his peers.In some ways, years beyond what his resume reports.He’s wrapping up his final round of observations for his teaching internship now. Just to see what they would do, he gave his students a project that they basically had full control over. He gave them some criteria but as far as how it was presented, they were in creative control.And wouldn’t you know it, that’s when magic happened.Kids were making islands in Minecraft. Turning plain paper into an old scroll like a pirate treasure map.And then one of them pops off and writes a multi-player game to complete his project.A game. Multi-player. Seventh grade.When we, the teachers, can get out of the way of our kids…There is no limit to what they can and will do to absolutely 100% amaze us and blow our minds.And there is no limit to what teachers can do in their classrooms if they try. Whether you’re in your first year or your thirty-first year of teaching.I’m honored to call Jeremy Shultz my friend. And if I can be half as awesome in the classroom as he is, I know I’ll do just fine.