Teaching is one of the most important roles in our society. But outside the profession, there are pervasive misconceptions about the day-to-day realities of the job. On one hand are those who believe teachers have it easy with workdays that end before rush hour and long, leisurely summers off. On the other extreme are those who think great teaching means always being on the clock, grading papers, making home visits, and sacrificing your health for the sake of your students.Five recent winners of TNTP’s Fishman Prize for Superlative Classroom Practice — one of the country’s most prestigious awards for public school teachers — decided to answer this question by keeping their eyes on the clock. For two weeks during the 2014–2015 school year, these teachers meticulously tracked their time, using an app to break down every hour of their day into clear, specific categories.Being a great teacher takes more than being a skilled and charismatic presenter of academic content. Educators today spend their days analyzing data, diagnosing student needs, collaborating with their colleagues, planning lessons, coordinating with parents, and much more. This is beyond the direct instruction, grading, and one-on-one time with students that most people associate with great teaching.Before sharing how these five teachers spend their time, let’s meet them. These men and women are achieving breakthrough gains with students in some of the most challenging school environments in the country. These are the educators who are defying the odds, day in and day out, in the classrooms that need them most. The kind that achieve more with their students in one year than some teachers achieve in two.(Top row, L-R) Jennifer Corroy Porras has been an IB English teacher at IDEA College Preparatory Donna in Donna, TX for 9 years. Kelly Zunkiewicz has been an Honors pre-calculus and AP calculus teacher at Earl J. Lennard High School in Ruskin, FL for 9 years. Laura Strait has been a 4th grade elementary teacher at Aspire ERES Academy in Oakland, CA, for 9 years.(Bottom row, L-R) Shira Fishman (for whom the prize is named) has been a geometry and calculus teacher at McKinley Technology High School in Washington, D.C. for 12 years. Steven Sanders has been a music teacher at UIC College Prep in Chicago, IL for 6 years.Here’s how Jenny, Kelly, Laura, Shira, and Steven spend their days. As you’ll notice, they do much more than lead classroom discussions. The numbers presented are the percent of time each teacher spends on each task.Here are some observations we had from looking through these numbers:While the data gathered by these five teachers doesn’t constitute a scientific study, this small sample size — and the discussion it inspired — reveals important insights about how great teachers spend their time. We hope these findings spark a much-needed debate about the daily work of teaching, and how school systems can do more to support a sustainable teaching profession.Do these numbers surprise you? How can schools find ways to make sure their best teachers have more time to devote to the activities they feel achieve the best results for kids? Should teachers be spending more time delivering instruction — or less? Who else on a school team could relieve teachers of tasks that don’t have a direct influence on student achievement?