My Story of Mortality and AwakeningBut Why Trust Me?So Why Teachers GuildSo How Can I Help?Dear Reader,I want to share with you how much I believe in what all of you are doing at Teachers Guild, and why I would love with all the sincerity in my heart to further your mission. I’d like to share how facing my mortality last year cultivated a deep self awareness that allowed me to discover my life purpose.In the summer of 2014, I was diagnosed with Grave’s Disease, which attacked my breathing, heart rate, nervous system, and other bodily functions. I couldn’t even open a water bottle. For the first time in my life, I had to face my own fragility and mortality. Though treatable, the sheer human terror of ceasing to exist gripped me. I felt oppressed by a gnawing sense of waste.Desperate, I pored over the works of spiritual leaders Thich Nhan Hanh, Sogyal Rinpoche, and Adyashanti to understand mindfulness, compassion, and meaning in death. I was inspired by David Menasche and the Dalai Lama, who both advocate for an education system that not only grows better minds, but ultimately better people. Through hundreds of hours reading, lamenting, meditating, and soul-searching, I painfully transformed my inner demons (cynicism, selfishness, avarice, and thanklessness) into self-defined values (curiosity, compassion, altruism, and gratitude).Mindfulness saved my life, and education gave me purpose. With this clarity — something that many spend their lives searching for — I’m dedicating my life to intersecting Design Thinking, Mindfulness, Play, and Civic Engagement into an integrated curriculum to develop young innovators and resourceful lifelong learners.Here are a few things I’m proud of:Simply put, our missions align closely. Teachers Guild equips educators with the Design Thinking for Educators Toolkit, and guides them through that process through 10-week Collaborations. I love the goal of 30 Collaborations in 3 years to help crystallize the impact of design thinking. The partnership with Medium shines a light on educators who are successfully integrating design thinking into their classrooms. (P.S. I especially enjoyed the 2-part series of radical collaboration between Regan and John!)This is actually where I would love your input. I’m formally trained in the design process, and live &amp; breathe it day in and day out as a designer. So whether it’s organizing design thinking workshops, highlighting local educators who practice design thinking, or creating new partnerships to create new opportunities for students, I am reaching out from a place of genuine curiosity and sincerely wish to volunteer my skills in furthering Teachers Guild’s mission!Sincerely,Norman Tran