A Great Teacher died and I missed my chance to say Thank YouAs well as all the horrible news about violence and injustice and suffering happening all over the world which I have spent way too much time consuming too much of and feeling bad about, I saw some other terrible news on facebook this week. Julian Richards who taught me English and Drama at my secondary school died of a sudden heart attack aged 53. I hadn’t seen him since I left school in 1997 but I am devastated to learn of his death.A few years ago I added him as a friend on facebook and at the time I started writing him a message. I wanted to say hi and tell him what I was up to and also to thank him and tell him what he meant to me, and because I really did love this teacher I found it hard to express myself in a casual way and it felt weird to be writing to him out of the blue like that and I got embarrassed and deleted the message, presuming I would write it another time. Now I will never get the chance.I always imagined that we’d bump into each other in a pub one day and have a drink and catch up and I could be honest with him about the influence he’s had in my life. I am so sad to think that will never happen.Mr Richards was my English teacher in year 7 and I think the first time he really impressed me was one day when he went totally off topic while we were reading a set-text and spent the whole lesson telling us (true) ghost stories. I had so much respect for him for not being scared of breaking the rules.I remember he had a nickname for everyone in the class and it made everyone feel important (even though mine was SLC — which stood for stroppy little cow!)I remember when it was sunny and we were in the drama studio he would take us out and do the lesson on the field instead and we had little rituals we would all have to stop and do whenever a train or a plane or a helicopter went past.I remember him trying to teach us improv techniques using games we’d seen on Whose Line is it Anyway.I remember the Edinburgh festival and the extra time he and David James put in to writing original plays for us to perform; those trips took so much effort and overtime what with rehearsals and fundraising and giving up a chunk of summer holiday to take us. I loved the Edinburgh trip so much I volunteered the following year as a helper with the year below me.I remember being asked to be in the ‘teachers’ play’ and feeling so privileged to be cast. I played his wife and he never learnt his lines properly and would jump around in the script and completely confuse my cues … and I was always furious but he was easy to forgive.I remember the coach breaking down on the way back from Edinburgh and Mr James and Mr Richards being worried about the budget not stretching for an extra meal (and of course no one had saved any spending money) and they got us to sing some songs from our play in the service station to get some free chips. It was excruciatingly embarrassing as an awkward teenager; singing acapella folk songs to baffled pensioners eating fish and chips but it was good to learn that if all else fails it is possible to sing for your supper. And that’s something I still do.He was so bright and warm and sarcastic and funny. He didn’t patronise us or talk to us like children. He encouraged risk-taking and rewarded creativity and knew that playing was the most effective way to learn. I am so grateful to have been taught by him. And I wish I could tell him. But I can’t. So I am telling you instead. I also want to give my condolences to his family and friends and all who will grieve him, of whom I know there are many.And please don’t wait, go and thank the teachers who have helped you see the world in different ways, tell them how important they are to you, maybe they have no idea.