HERE ARE 10 REASONS THERE WILL NEVER BE A TEACHER DRAFTED TO PUBLIC EDUCATIONTeachers are the real MVP.Now you might question the humility in that statement, but how many NBA first round draft picks have ever in life been required to be humble? NONE. Most NBA stars are the loudest, cockiest, most trash talking ego maniacs to be found on the planet earth because they can run, jump, shoot, or dribble (well most of them can) and we, the fans, cater to that. We love it. They know their worth as an important part of American culture and they are paid for it, constantly reminding us on twitter, Instagram and every other form of social media how great they really are. So why don’t we have the same type of enthusiasm for other, clearly more life changing vocations . . . like teaching?No one can legitimately deny that teachers daily invest in the lives of students, by parenting, mentoring, counseling, feeding, clothing, protecting, and teaching, often from their already meager teacher’s salary. Simply put, teachers do for their students what society (parents included) can’t and won’t and we do it all under a most scathing scrutiny.If we are at all honest, the continued success of our country is really fed by the efforts of countless servants in public education, a waning body of financial martyrs, who now also risk literally dying like soldiers in the line of duty all the while being drug through the mud by the media, presidents, congress, private interest groups, parents, and students. Yet, all of them had teachers on the way to their success.I know. I know. I make it all sound pretty bad. Well, it is really bad. You don’t have to believe me. The evidence is all around us. Even time Magazine’s October 2014 cover, “Rotten Apples” focused on a scathing criticism of teachers who are overworked and underpaid in a job no one else wants to do. Mind you, Time, one of this country’s most read and most respected, longstanding magazines, seems to take up its attack on teachers every few years. In December 2008, the cover story was “How to Fix America’s Schools.” These stories both unfairly smear the efforts of the most under appreciated, lowest paid profession that actually requires a college degree. Both stories and others like them also ignore the responsibility and accountability of the other stakeholders who point accusatory fingers at teachers, but they all somehow continue to benefit from the human capital produced by schools.I am in my twenty-second year in service as an urban public school teacher and I am working without a contract, making $31,000 LESS than I made last year. How is that possible? Long story, but it’s true. I, along with my colleagues in an inherently altruistic profession are on the brink of ruin as we are publicly shamed and defamed, all the while public education’s barns and storehouses are “ransacked and burned” by private interests who have conquered the final frontier, the “untouchable” pool of money set aside for compensatory education.In any case, I’ve come up with ten reasons there will NEVER be a draft for teachers going into public education. (These are listed in no special order.)Okay, I’ll admit that if teachers were drafted to public education like basketball players are drafted to the NBA, I probably wouldn’t be going in the first round, but only because there are countless other teaching professionals who are more humble and dedicated to their job of delivering quality education to every child and for that reason I’d say. . .