In a very inspiring talk, Tim O’Reilly (media and open source advocate) puts government and its corollary — school — into perspective. His point is simple: “Education is an open system”.In his speech, he explains government should learn from Apple’s huge pioneering marketplace: the app store provides a platform and only fundamental tools to let anyone build on it (what O’ Reilly calls ‘Government 2.0' when applied to the public sphere).Applied to education, Apple’s model would then: ‘change the mission from delivering courses (i.e. applications) to creating services that help teachers (i.e. developers) build and deliver learning opportunities.’How can we leverage this digitalisation of educational content to scale a better school (both its content and its teacher tools)? And to what extent can digital tools be relevant in developing countries to promote a low-tech education approach?Digital school and the long tail of education.Digitalisation of educational content challenges traditional models as they help scale education and unlock it everywhere. Khan Academy, the online education platform for kids, represents this shift and promotes a learning based on cooperation. It promotes the ‘flipped classroom’ and inverts the learning pattern: students learn classes as homeworks watching Youtube videos and mainly work on it through exercises in classes in the daytime. Knowledge no longer flows from one teacher to all of his/her students but flows from one student to another, transforming teachers into helping nodes in a peer-to-peer network.This education model isn’t the promotion of self-learning, it’s an in-depth movement that promotes customisable education with unlimited online content to back it. Does this mean that anyone can become a teacher and that school is doomed? Of course not. It does mean we can now access a whole new potential that enables the “long tail of education”.Online educational content contributes to a ‘long tail of education’ exactly the same way Chris Andersen conceptualised e-commerce for physical shopping. It gives unlimited access to education content (for e-commerce, goods) regardless of the school (for e-commerce, shop) shelves’ capacity. This also applies to the tools used in the classroom.Scaling tools as well as content is key.Brazil is the second biggest education market after the US (200M inhabitants with a real investment policy in private initiatives). For a country with its diversity, Brazil has always been a huge education lab and leads to major education innovations.qMagico is definitely one of them as it offers the massive digitalisation of schools in a cost-effective way. This service is a wonderful tool for teachers to turn schools into platforms in the O’Reilly style: curricula are suggested but can be built on top of, students grades are tracked and teachers have a better understanding of what’s happening in their class.The platform fully embraces the education ‘long tail’ concept and gives access to limitless content that teachers can tap into to enable a truly personalized education.Scaling physical schools in a cost-effective way? The case for a relevant bottom of the pyramid education with Bridge Academy.Scaling education is now fully possible with digitalization of content and tools (the cost for a extra student is virtually null). Nevertheless, users should always come first and leverage tech, not the other way around. A great example that embodies this? Bridge International Academy.Bridge Academy costs 5$ per month. It doesn’t seem a lot but where it is based, Kenya, it’s quite an investment and reflects a real shift. Marketed as the “Starbucks for Education”, Bridge Academy has already opened more that 200 schools in the country in the last few years and their schools train 50,000 kids per day.In the classroom, you won’t find one laptop per child, in fact, very few students own one. The relevant (low-cost) technology is on the teacher side: curricula are digitalized and pushed directly to instructors in schools when needed. Students are challenged as their progresses are tracked and teachers can easily find the most relevant exercise for each of them.School can therefore become a double platform: both from the “container” (framework and low-tech material easily replicated) and the “content” side (a harmonized online program with relevant tools in the O’Reilly perspective).Finally, a true cost-effective approach for education that can scale. Beat that, One Lap Top Per Child.