Technology is seriously changing the status quo of education.New software is great, but ultimately meaningless if wrapped in red tape.Teachers need thought partners and role models.There needs to be room for teachers’ voices in the design of educational resources.By Donnie DicusLast week, I had the opportunity to attend the ASU/GSV Summit in Scottsdale, Arizona, the premier conference on educational technology (or “EdTech”). Over 2,500 innovators and entrepreneurs were in attendance, discussing new trends in iPad software and online curriculum. Everyone was working, in some way, to improve teaching and learning for tomorrow.As a teacher — the ultimate recipient of most EdTech, though sadly underrepresented at dynamic gatherings like last week’s— here are four observations I made at the Summit:“The world is reshaping quicker than we can reshape ourselves,” said Dov Siedman, who heads a leadership consultancy. This point may be obvious to some, but as a full-time teacher, I hadn’t fully appreciated it until last week.Siedman’s statement precisely describes today’s state of education. Educators are losing a race and are bound to stay behind. Meanwhile, technology is being developed at lightning speed. In the last decade, I have quit using a camera, a walkman, a DVD player, and a desktop computer. All of those devices now fit in a single, much sleeker, pocket-sized gadget.The Summit was a technocrat’s fever dream. I saw cameras that could grade homework in seconds and social studies textbooks on mobile devices. I watched two young girls play an interactive video game that covered every topic in a science course. Arne Duncan, the Secretary of Education, even shared his desire to eradicate paper textbooks and use that money for other resources, like e-books.While being introduced to countless new products, I couldn’t help but think about the logistical hurdles I’d have to overcome to actually bring them to my students.Teachers are some of the most highly adaptive and flexible people in the world. We can plan the most elaborate, thoughtful lessons — only to be derailed when our students walk in fatigued or hungry. A fire drill might go off, so our awesome science lesson has to be cut down to 20 minutes. An effective teacher can mentally rearrange a whole day in a matter of minutes. We are constantly reshaping what is happening in our classroom.During my first year of teaching, I wanted to build a classroom library for my students. I knew they didn’t have access to books at home, so I wanted to provide them with an opportunity to read. I needed funds, so I researched grants and wrote a proposal to prove that my practice would impact student achievement. After being approved, I had to wait for the funds to be delivered to me. I then had to present the funds so they could be approved by my school board. After all that, I had to select a company that my school district worked with to get the books. I then had to wait for the books to be shipped to my school and processed into our school inventory. The whole process took nine months. By the time I got the books, most were below my students’ reading level. They had outgrown them by the time we got them.My story exemplifies the hoops through which a teacher needs to jump to obtain materials or resources for their classroom. It’s not just a matter of cherry-picking the best resources. A teacher needs to acquire the funds, research potential student impact, find approved sellers, and win the hearts of the school board. It is an extensive amount of work. If we want to stay current and reshape our classrooms in a timely manner, districts and school boards need to eliminate the hurdles. It needs to be easier for a teacher to acquire resources.Fortunately, there are some teachers who have learned how to handle all of this red tape and transform their classrooms into modern day meccas of learning.Tanisha Dixon is a middle school social studies teacher in Washington D.C. She was one of two teachers I found at the 2500-person Summit. Her story, about how she reshaped her classroom to move into the 21st century, was highly inspirational for me. She made me realize that teachers can accomplish a lot with a little hard work, grit, and elbow grease.Arne Duncan shared her story during his keynote presentation on Tuesday morning. For the past 11 years, she has been teaching at a school with a high rate of poverty and many special needs students. Her school was restructured six years ago, and since, proficiency rates in reading and math have tripled.While this may sound like incredible progress to many teachers, to Dixon, it was just the beginning. Students’ proficiency rates were in the low teens previously, and tripling meant that a third of the students were now proficient. She was not happy with that number.Dixon asked herself, “What can I do for my students that to engage them and give them access to first-rate learning?” She began to research the “blended learning” model of teaching, in which students learn at their own pace, partly using technology. Through a grant, she secured tablets for every student in her class.She structured her class into three stations: a small group station in which she delivers instruction to 3–5 students at a time, a collaborative station in which students work together to solve problems, and an independent station in which students may work on individual assignments.Dixon overcame several hurdles as she transformed her classroom. She had to teach students to manage the devices. The technology meant new classroom procedures and disciplinary measures. Also, like most schools, there is only one IT person for her district. If problems arose with the technology, she would either solve it herself or stop her instruction and call a 1–800 number to help walk her through a solution.Teachers already have many different hats to wear. At times, we are nurses, counselors, educators, or secretaries. Dixon said that the technology required her to also become an IT specialist.Since shifting to a blended learning model, Dixon said she noticed significant changes in her students. Students were used to coming to her for answers. Now they are more independent. They have learned strategies (like Google) to find their own answers. She has also found engagement to improve. The devices and programs are entertaining for students to use, so they are more focused. And since they are more focused, they are learning more material. She uses the term “edutainment” to describe this phenomenon.Dixon has also found that her students are more adaptable and flexible. If teachers want to reshape the world and their classrooms, these are the traits we want to inculcate in our students. The world will change drastically by the time they finish high school. We need to prepare them to handle those changes.Thought partners can bounce ideas off of each other and offer feedback. They can push one another when needed. “Some days it’s easier to go back to old ways,” she said. “If we want our students to work through problems, we need to show grit and persevere for our students.”Perhaps most surprisingly, some education entrepreneurs at the Summit actually asked for my professional opinion about the resources I was using in my classroom.For example, while waiting for lunch, one exhibitor showed me a program called BeeLine Reader that provides text in different colors. As a reader moves from left to right, the text changes color, making it easier to read. This tool helps students to track words more efficiently, allowing them to read text quickly and more fluently. Currently, I use clunky pieces of colored plastic for this purpose; far from amazing technology!During lunch, I sat next to an executive from Learning A-Z, which is a website I used for years. We talked about what I appreciated about the website. I also told him how, after a round of budget cuts, my school could sadly no longer afford the license.I was a bit dumbfounded. I’m the one who would ultimately use these resources — but until this conference, had never been involved in the design process. Going forward, what role could I play as decisions are being made to reshape my classroom?I know that the reason my opinion was being asked was because I happened to be in the room. I was fortunate enough to have been able to attend this Summit. What about the thousands of other teachers? How can we make sure the technology actually works for them? How can we make sure that they have a voice as well?In his book Teaching 2030, Barnett Berry states that schools are cluttered with the detritus of past traditions. He continues by saying that there should be no sacred cows in education. All aspects of brick and mortar schools should be challenged. I couldn’t agree more.When I walked through the Summit’s bright blue foyer, I didn’t think I would find anything useful for my classroom. I thought it would be a lot of bells and whistles — and that my district’s bureaucracy would keep me from ever getting these amazing innovations. I assumed there would be nothing for me to take back to my third grade students the next day. I was right in that regard. There isn’t much for me to take back to my students now.I have grown tired of sitting on the sidelines. This conference has shown me that I am responsible to know what entrepreneurs are trying to put into my field. I can reach out to them and start a dialogue. I am now officially sitting at the table and giving my voice to the discussions that will impact my practice.Bright is made possible by funding from the New Venture Fund, and is supported by The Bill &amp; Melinda Gates Foundation.