TEACHERS VS. EVERYBODYI really resent the comments and the attitude that teachers do not care about the students if they go on strike, or due to the sick-outs and other protests that are happening in Detroit. I really find it interesting that these comments derive primarily from individuals who do not have one tenth of clue about what it takes to provide a quality education.Teachers have been shouldering the blame for everything. Teachers are even blamed for students missing school due to snow days that were called in the past to prevent students from traveling within the intense cold and inclement weather.Stop it.I urge all to look at ALL of the facts here. Teachers are standing up for the children within the Detroit community whereas the majority of the community IS NOT. The teachers employed by Detroit Public Schools have been horribly mistreated, their salaries cut to pay down debt caused by the State and other authorizers, an increase in costs for healthcare, and a severe decrease in tools and basic resources to educate our children in the inner city. Many people are out here on strike for less.You want to know why our kids are behind? Because here in 2016, education is STILL separate and unequal. The inner city school systems INCLUDING charter schools do not have the same access to resources, materials or even the professional development as more affluent cities just a stone’s throw away from Detroit. Money is not available to provide supplemental resources for students who have special needs. There is a severe teacher shortage because many in their right minds will not work for Detroit Public Schools. Really… who would sign up for that after witnessing how teachers are poorly paid and mistreated. Why is it that no one is really getting angry about this?Teaching is not a community service. Our classrooms ARE NOT a daycare, nor there to give you a break. Instead of criticizing the teachers, who are at the very least fighting for the children left in our care, YOU SHOULD BE JOINING THEM.There should be outrage that the city has been getting the shaft for decades and that this Governor, the same Governor that poisoned $7,000 children and countless adults in Flint, the same Governor who gave himself absolute power to the point that regardless of what we vote for, or who we vote in… comes in and disregards due process and does whatever he wants, has placed the cherry on top of an already disheartening and stressful situation with his dismantlement of the education system in Detroit.It is really easy to blame teachers. However, it is not the teachers. When students are sitting in classrooms packed with 40 to 50 other students… that is not the teachers. The district not being able to pay for books, paper, supplies or even TOILET TISSUE… that is not the teachers. When the heat does not work in the buildings, that is not the fault of the teachers. The millions of dollars of repair work that STILL needs to be done on these buildings, are not the fault of the teachers. The fact that the Detroit Public School System cannot afford to hire teachers. Is not the fault of the teachers.Now… the Detroit Public Schools system has publicly reported that the money for the district WILL RUN OUT IN APRIL 2016. Teachers will not be paid, the schools can not run. Thousands of workers will not be able to provide for their families.The teachers employed by Detroit Public Schools have faithfully waited for years for things to turn around. They have been compliant. They have taken the cuts and the shots at their livelihood with more grace than they should have. Teachers are not volunteers, or community service workers. They are professionals. They are the professionals that make every other profession possible. It takes courage to take a stand. It is really easy to sit back and point fingers. But while you are pointing… sit back and reflect.. what are YOU doing to stand up for our children? This next generation of leaders!Published in Higher Education Revolution