Giving Back to Teachers In NeedOkay, the deal is teachers in lots of schools never get a break, and that’s often true in schools that serve military families, too. DonorsChoose.org is about teachers getting the resources they need, and doing it right.One really good way to give teachers a break is by donating through DonorsChoose.org. They’re a great example of how we should all use the Net to help each other out, by pooling a few dollars to give people a break. DonorsChoose is something I can understand. It’s like microfinance applied to classroom projects; we all can contribute a little to fund a classroom projects. Teachers are under-appreciated and underpaid, and if we all work together, we can help ‘em out.There’re a lot of underfunded school districts out there, and it’s real unfair for teachers to fund stuff from their own (inadequate) salaries. Note: I’m on the DonorsChoose board.After I introduced Stephen Colbert to DonorsChoose, he began to focus on milfams, and I tried a similar effort later, but it didn’t persist. However, I’m talking with people in milfam groups and the DoD about creating a program that’ll keep on helping. And I did a matching campaign with DonorsChoose a coupla years ago.I still fund teacher’s projects on a regular basis, because I’ve learned that giving in this way really makes a difference. I’ve gotten a few notes from teachers, and here’s what they’ve got to say:Having the supplies to teach should be a fundamental right, but it’s not. It’s our job to give back to the people who are educating generation after generation.Tech is increasingly popular in classrooms around the world, and folks should have access to technology for learning.Many of you know that I focus lots of my efforts on veterans and military families. Many of the students who need support in the classroom are kid of milfams. We need to make sure we’re giving back to these families who give up so much for us. I figure it’s the least I can do.Beyond that, I want to increase DonorsChoose brand recognition and awareness of this kind of microfinance.Beyond that, I want to spread the message that regular people can make a difference.Can you give back? #respect4teachers