He also left a legacy.What is a legacy?The question is: What’s yours?How to leave a legacy:Mr. Hermanson taught his students a lot.I once wrote about thanking your kids’ teachers.At the fifth grade graduation that inspired those words, my wife and I thanked Mr. Hermanson for all the support and attention he had given our son, Dylan.Bryce Hermanson was a substitute teacher at our son’s elementary school. He spent his career as a full-time educator and had retired a few years earlier, but continued to substitute at the elementary schools in our district.Our son told us that whenever he heard his regular teacher was going to be out, he always hoped Mr. Hermanson would be the sub.Mr. Hermanson was one of my son’s favorite teachers, even though he had him as a teacher only a few times a year. However, because he was a substitute teacher, he got to see my son develop between first and fifth grades.At the end of our conversation at the graduation, Mr Hermanson told us, “There is no one like Dylan.” He left us feeling very special about our son.Those were the last words he said to us.Bryce Hermanson died on July 12th, 2015 — a few weeks after suffering a massive heart attack. He was 59 years old.He wasn’t married and had no children. He left behind his mother and his twin brother, BryanLegacy is the thing people will remember you for when you die.When we think about legacies, we think about presidents, business leaders, artists, or celebrities.Some legacies are positive.Some are not.Some are more memorable than others.My kids knew Mr. Hermanson had a heart attack. They knew he wasn’t doing well, but they weren’t prepared when they got word he passed away.They spent that day sharing stories about him, laughing, crying. As I write this, they’ve moved from their initial shock and grief to fond remembrances.I don’t think anyone is going to build a statue of him. He probably won’t have buildings named after him. Maybe there will be a small plaque at Moody or Hopkins Elementary school dedicated to his memory.But he left a legacy with thousands of students.Day in and day out, he went to work teaching kids, believing in them, encouraging them to do their best. The kids loved him.My son loved him so much that one Halloween, he dressed up in Mr. Hermanson’s signature look — a sweater with a sport coat over it.Mr. Hermanson left a legacy not because he created monuments or passed laws or built organizations or world-changing products.He built his legacy through caring about his students and their families.Everyday, he gave everything he had. And even though he was adored by students through his years of teaching, he was a humble person. His twin brother talked about knowing that he enjoyed his work but had no idea how loved he was at the schools in which he taught.If the world had more legacies like Mr. Hermanson’s, it would be a better place.The most important lesson he taught was in how he lived:Do something you care about.Give it all you’ve got.Be humble.Do that over and over everyday.Make a difference in the lives of other people.Help them be better versions of themselves.