Teachers! Add Technology To Your Classroom! (The Right Way)If you’re a teacher like me, you are entering panic mode: School starts soon, and you haven’t put your share of thought and preparation into how to make your existence in school more beneficial to students.It’s times like these that people generally default to the generally accepted improvements — “hands-on”, “student-centered” usually wend their way into a teacher’s vows to oneself. “Raise ________ scores” and “focus on _______ aspect of the curriculum” are other favorites. Whatever fends off the guilt that comes with 3/4 of a summer of torpor by the pool, and can be SMART goal oriented, is typical fare.There’s another genre of improvement, though, that I’d like to focus on: the addition/use of technology in the classroom. This year, thousands and thousands of teachers will make the commitment to infuse “technology” into the classroom. And they will fail. They will end up frustrated at their students’ lack of interest in the technology. Instead of staring at a piece of paper, seemingly intent on waiting out the teacher with feigned hopelessness until the teacher steps in and makes the assignment easier, they do the same with a screen. In a science class (I teach science), they will take the new sensors that hook up wirelessly to the computer (technology, right?), and be dragged through the experiment just as unwillingly as if they didn’t have such tools.Here’s the prologue of the problem: Teachers often confuse using technology with technology itself. The ambiguity surrounding the assertion, “I will incorporate technology into the classroom,” is the downfall of many teachers. To them, use of technological tools is one and the same with imbuing their classrooms with technology. They are almost certainly missing the boat. Really, the use of these tools should be the outcome of incorporating technology into their classrooms.This leads to the main problem: many teachers don’t realize what technology really is.Here are some thoughts about what technology is:From these thoughts, the point that is both the most salient, but also the least understood, is that Pedagogy IS Technology! When a teacher sets up their classroom to ensure maximal meaningful learning (pedagogy), they are using/applying what they know about learning to design a process to solve a problem (technology). The teachers adding technological tools to their classroom without first sussing out the pedogogical underpinnings of the addition — sure, they are adding technology, but they are not doing what teachers should be doing, which is making technology. Problem-based Learning is a technological construct! Multi-aged classrooms — and single-aged classrooms — technology! Grade schemes (including gradeless classrooms) — technology!It seems as though some teachers, whether they know it or not, add technology as a substitute for actually looking at their lesson/unit construct and facing the fact that it just isn’t working. In this way, technology can actually be a detriment to certain teachers, especially the particularly proud or obtuse ones; it complicates things and obfuscates the shortcomings, as well as provides an “out” for the teacher: “I’m trying all these modern things, but these students aren’t appreciating it at all…” What they need to do is look at the technology in the construct of the lesson/unit, and work on that. (But they never do, which is a topic for another day.)So if you’re one of the teachers that has made the oath to incorporate “technology” into your classroom, stop and think where you should start: amending your own pedagogy, or deciding what shiny trinket to add to your classroom. Odds are, if you choose the latter, not much will happen because you have made nothing new in your classroom, only added something. But if you choose the former, that’s when education is really affected in your classroom; you have made the decision to be an Engineer — a technology maker, not merely a user.The best teachers ARE engineers, boldly inventing technologies that will push the education world forward. And if those inventions require laptops, wireless sensors, netbooks, interactive whiteboards, Google software, etc., then so be it! If not, then don’t fret — you have added technology to your classroom; you can bet on it.