I hand out the worksheet on static electricity and fix my gaze to my laptop. The class works away and it’s quiet, save for the shuffling of feet, occasional whisper, and miscellaneous fidgeting deep-rooted in the constitution of middle school children.The hush is broken, predictably, by the Chattiest:Where’d you go to college? he asks.I answer.And what’d you major in?English, I say.And you’re a science teacher because…He trails off, expecting me to promptly finish his thought.The Smartest chimes in:He’s a substitute.I glance towards him.Yes, I say, nodding.I’m a substitute.Diploma: (n.) the most expensive piece of paper imaginable; wish granter; dream murderer.The handshake was sweaty. Quick and sweaty. A side effect of long minutes listening to speeches I now forget, baking under the sterile white lights of the auditorium in my creaky chair. That handshake, though met with ambivalent enthusiasm from the other party, held romantic promise. After the clammy exchange, I received a leather binder with gold stencil on the cover and nothing inside.This held my future.It’s a moment of wonderment and delightful uncertainty. This empty container signified a new path, a new beginning. This was my passport to a rewarding and challenging career, one with responsibility and health insurance. It marked the stirring finale of third-hand textbooks and beer-caked carpets and waking up at noon for no good reason. The trappings of undergraduate life were shucked off, left by the wayside as I finished the uneasy stroll across stage, smiling in the direction of my parents and blushing at my whooping, hung-over roommates. In less than a minute, in front of a sizable group of strangers, I became an adult.In the movies, the flashback occurs here. Everything turns to slow motion as Thom Yorke sings over a montage of the past, all that has happened to bring the smiley character to that point in time. In real life, the reminiscing happens later.Eventually, though, we all think back to childhood and reflect on what our third grade selves would become. The vocational wish list for boys has been the same since the dawn of time: fireman, cowboy, ninja, and, of course, most male superheroes.But after hearing the glitzy occupations from his friends, no seven-year-old confesses an undying passion to be wrenched from sleep at dawn by an unfamiliar voice telling which school he’d spend the day at, tending to undersized miscreants drunk on sugar and cable TV.Over semester breaks in college I was on the make for disposable income. With no job to fall back on and no desire to work at any of the Dunkin’ Donuts in town, I signed up to be a substitute teacher.This, I realized later, was job training.In the academic world, substitutes are to certified teachers as Officer Krupke is to the FBI. And after graduating with a bachelor’s degree in English, that’s what I became: the scholastic equivalent of mall security.Busy Work: (n.) the bane of any student’s existence; remorseless killer of trees.Though I don’t recall the names from my formative years, there are a certain few disgruntled faces lurking in the deep recesses of my psyche. Age varied at times, but they all wore the same expression: a look tired and frowny, assembled over many shitty mornings. They’d clomp up to the desk carrying a book I never heard of, or knitting needles, and introduce themselves. Next they gave the class the spiel, something we substitutes all possess, loosely translated as:I am a Stranger and you cannot know my first name. Your Real Teacher has left you Busy Work because I am incapable of conducting an Actual Lesson. I will hand out the sheet or give you the page numbers, and you will go to work. Remain quiet, as I am already unhappy, and continued senseless chatter will cause me to become more so.Following the spiel, they’d give us work and we would get to it, more or less, and carry on with our conversations. Mr. or Mrs. Whatever would yell, threatening some Vaguely Fictitious Punishment and continue reading his or her book or knitting his or her sweater. This repeated itself until the bell rang.I remember their mood, because the mood of a substitute teacher runs on a continuum. Dark clouds swirl overhead, breaking only during prep periods, undisturbed lunch breaks, and the afternoon exodus. This maelstrom of turmoil and self-loathing leaves them in a constant state of irritation, as if they locked their keys in the car moments before stepping into class.*They mailed my diploma and I put it into the once empty passport. I didn’t have much of a plan, but around August, a prestigious and pricey middle school outside Boston hired me as an intern and a year of indentured servitude began. I’d live on campus, coach three sports, and pretend to be a teacher.The first year was inconstant and unpredictable. More often than not, I’d camp in the back of someone’s classroom, fake-listening, with my laptop open. I was 22, in khakis, tie and a blazer, burning my tongue on the morning coffee, emailing a college roommate about nothing in particular. Those days included a heavy dose of SportsCenter and a nap.Other times I’d be called into action at sun-up. I’d hear the word math as I sipped the first of many mugs and knew it would be a bad day. Then, under contractual obligation, I skulked into a classroom wallpapered in arithmetic posters to bullshit my abilities to not only teach, but teach a subject in which I’m fairly certain I have a mild learning disability.Another challenge came at lunch duty. Familiar with the phrase from childhood, I now understand the inglorious nature of the assignment. Never was it called Midday Food Occasion or Minimal Effort Luncheon Responsibility, but it carried the moniker of duty, like it was an auxiliary function of the Marine Corps. I’d sit at the assigned table, forced to eat with middle or, even worse, elementary school students for upwards of 35 minutes. I did my best to avoid eye contact and conversation altogether as they readied precarious spoonfuls of mashed potatoes and held discussions of nothing intellectual whatsoever.Other instances, I would fill in for the phys. ed teacher. And after four minutes of playing pillowy orb Dodgeball, I had more than one student crying and more than five pointing the finger at alleged rule-breakers.Another day, in the pouring autumn rain, I even drove to pick up pizzas.The year ended and I moved back to New Hampshire. Back to the life I tried to escape in the first place by moving to Massachusetts. The summer went, and near the end of my tether of sanity, I got a call.Bullshit: (v.) to feign knowledge of certain key facts, concepts, student names, important dates, etc. over the course of a school day, school year.The prestigious and pricey middle school gave me a contract to teach a month of seventh and eighth grade history. From there I’d move down to sixth grade for a maternity leave stint as a language arts teacher and continue being the blanket thrown onto the sick teacher fire, all the while coaching sports I never played and looking for affordable healthcare.Teaching sixth grade was the most substantial thing I had done since graduating. For an instant in my newfound adulthood, I called myself a Real Teacher. I had my own classroom, planned my own lessons, and taught awkward 12 year-olds the subordinate clause. That time, albeit brief, showed me I could actually teach.But as I started to get comfortable, the teachers I filled in for were welcomed back. They answered questions about their health and showed pictures of their newborns, and eventually my name was removed from my teacherly abode and dropped into the recycle bin. An abrupt reminder of my impermanence.As soon as the Real Teachers settled in at their desks, I relocated to the back burner, and waited impatiently for a phone call.*There is no glamor in the idea of early mornings in front of nameless adolescents, distributing work they don’t want to do. Something shakes loose in a child when they see a stranger behind the desk of the person they normally irritate. The moral fibers twist and shrink, and they develop superhuman abilities to slack off and act out simultaneously.Hoodlum youngsters aside, the other burden is the lesson plan left by the Real Teacher, who I imagined not being sick with the flu but lounging on the couch, bourbon in hand, catching up on recorded television shows. Lesson plans, especially for a sub, are a quixotic blueprint. They assign Busy Work to each class, jockeying students into uniform sample sizes ostensibly capable of making it through one period without killing me or one other in the process. If the plans are handwritten, the day is a wash, as there’s no deciphering the Dead Sea Scrolls in time to placate the class into doing anything productive.Being a sub means shooting for a mediocre day: a period of time from 7:30 to 3:30 where students do or, at the very least, pretend to do classwork.Being a sub means subjecting yourself to the unpredictability of the phone call. It could come the night before, but as such things go, it usually arrives in the sleepy hours of the morning, right when the naked movie star is getting excitable.We are the warm bodies: the seemingly responsible presence that ensures minimal issues for the Real Teacher to deal with upon return. We are the underpaid bouncers taking care of unruly patrons hopped up not on alcohol, but cans of Red Bull and an industrial size bag of Swedish Fish.Can I Go to the Bathroom?: Frequently asked, grammatically incorrect question.I imagine the union meetings of the local Substitute Teachers Guild taking place in a building resembling the Elks Club in my hometown. Fluorescent lights illuminate the room, the oppressive kind, with the token few bulbs long defunct but never changed. The ceiling tile is weathered with age, stained by water damage from a leaky roof and the soda splatter of too many middle school semi-formals.We file in, mumbling vaguely polite greetings to one another. There is a spread of decrepit metal folding chairs that look like they were taken from a church basement. On the far wall is a table with a plastic tray of cruller donuts and aging coffee. Another table is littered with crossword puzzles and back issues of Newsweek and Reader’s Digest.After milling about, we take our seats and someone steps behind the podium. Someone with blood, sweat, and tears in the business. A lifer, a veteran. Somebody, I realize, I once pestered.This is my first time, so it feels like an AA meeting. The permeable aroma of coffee and former cigarettes and old-people-perfume hangs in the air. Everyone seems unhappy. I notice the age difference, and it’s startling. And segregated. The young try not to talk about what brought us here, just that we’re here.We have a hard time paying attention and check our phones more than we should. The Elders target us as non-believers, just as they did when they barked orders in third period algebra. Some young member mentions the idea of a guild Facebook page for continued discussions and solidarity. We hear groans and guffaws throughout the crowd. Mrs. Leary halts her sudoku, looks up and sighs.The meeting ends and we file out. The young members head to a bar to poke fun at the Elders and hatch plans to find a Real Job. We try to figure out what went awry along the way that brought us to this perplexing moment, rudderless and confused. We worry this is what our lives will amount to: being a grown-up and being unhappy, surrounded by tiny humans that won’t listen to a thing we say.It’s understood that this is our situation for now. We’re doing what we can to pay bills. But we feel disingenuous, like we don’t belong. We plot against the Elders. We want out. The meetings are boring, the company is dreary, and the coffee sucks. Someday we will hand in our union cards and start fresh somewhere else.Someday soon, we say.I finish my whiskey and say my goodbyes. Sleep beckons. The call to battle comes early, with more worksheets to hand out and children to scold. But we press onward, heads high and mugs full, knowing that something better comes next. It has to, we say. It must.