“Why Can’t They Make it Easier to Become a Teacher?”I can always tell when people have stopped thinking and are just repeating something they heard without a critical look at the premise.She said without thinking, “I just don’t see why they can’t make it easier to become a teacher.”And I said, “And of course, we shouldn’t stop with teachers. I don’t see why they can’t make it easier to become a dentist.”She looked confused.“I mean,” I continued, “there are a lot of people who have ideas about how to take care of teeth. There are a lot of people who have really good teeth, and they just want to help other people have healthy teeth.”She furrowed her brow trying to catch the thread of connection and pull it through the eye of some needling of understanding. I caught the silent, “What are you talking about?” in her expression. I’m used to that look. I carried on.“We have to stop making people jump through hoops just to become dentists. We should make it easier to become a dentist so smart people don’t have to take a bunch of college classes and boring internships to learn from an experienced professional. We should let them give it a try and then make it really easy to fire them if it doesn’t work out.”“I mean,” I concluded with my big finish, “what’s the worst that could happen?”She smiled. “Oh. I get it. You’re not serious.”Of course, she did not get it. I am deadly serious. When “reform” of the teaching profession has led otherwise perfectly intelligent and thoughtful people to say things like, “Let’s make it easier to be a teacher,” we’re all in big trouble.If we’re to take a lesson from Finland, Singapore and other top-rated countries in the education world, they started reforming their flagging systems by taking teacher preparation very seriously. They made their colleges of education places of prestige.They made sure their teachers understood content of their subjects, yes, but that was only the beginning. They made sure their teachers understood child development, creative intervention with children who didn’t get it the first time, the diversity of learning styles, design of instruction, multiple ways to assess student knowledge, how to engage parents, the uses of technology, and more and more and more.Not less.Which brings me to dentists. I throw out The Dentist Card a lot these days. I judge proposals for school “reform” (which I will always put in quotes until the word actually means something) in terms of how it would look if we applied it to dentists.Alternative routes to dentistry? Publicly ranking dentists by the number of root canals performed? Pay by cavities? Telling a dentist that if they’re a good enough dentist, they won’t need assistants like dental hygienists or office staff? Telling dentists that they need to see twice the number of patients in the same number of hours but that they will still be held responsible for individualized, personalized, quality work?I’m thinking that dentists could be the teacher’s best friend in finding the benchmark floor on whether we’re thinking rationally about building school transformation through greater teacher professionalism or whether we’re just not thinking.Originally published at lilysblackboard.org