Dear __________,I know we haven’t met, yet, but I’m sincerely and anxiously looking forward to meeting you in August when my daughter starts school in your kindergarten class. It’s been a difficult decision for me to make, to send her to kindergarten this year, but my husband and I have finally made up our minds, and she is coming. Ready or not, here comes our little bug, to begin kindergarten.It’s not because she’s not ready, our hesitance in deciding whether or not to send her. We’re so thankful that she is indeed very ready. We’ve been blessed with a very special little girl. She’s reading already and can do quite a bit of math. She’s great at making friends. She can run and play for hours on end. Her communication skills are super; she’s a good little talker and listener. She plays tennis and t-ball, and has learned to ice-skate too. She can sing the Star Spangled Banner without missing a beat and loves to perform. She loves to dance, too, of course. She knows a little Spanish. She’s empathetic and kind. Yes, truly there’s no denying she’s ready to move onto a new challenge and experience life with some newfound independence.Given all of her preparedness, you must be wondering why I’ve been so hesitant with this decision. You see, it’s because I know. I too, have worked where you work now. It’s because of everything I know about the status of education in our country, and specifically in a district like this, that I’m not keen on my daughter spending her beautiful childhood days in the standardized environment that lies inside of those idyllic brick walls.I understand you need to teach the Common Core standards, and quite honestly, I’m a-okay with that. In fact, as I browse through the standards (they’ve changed a bit since I taught kindergarten, a few years back) I realize she’s already met most of them. I have faith that you’re going to be a great teacher and you’ll recognize if and when a student in your class has met a particular standard already. I know you’ll provide extension activities for those who have already met standards and I also trust that you’ll provide interventional activities for students who are struggling to understand new concepts. I know you will, because that’s what good teachers do.Yes, the more I think of it, the Common Core standards are the least of my concerns. What is concerning, is the approach that many districts are taking to ensure all of these standards are met (or met as defined by the standardized test, for whatever that’s worth). At least, that’s my best guess as to why central offices, school boards, and administrators are pushing great teachers into such sterile and dull boxes. I cannot determine any other plausible reason why these officials would put such pressure and restraint on the excellent teachers they hire. Common Core standards must be met, so the top dogs (whoever the may be) determine how best to force teachers to force students to meet these standards.When this happens, when great teachers and empathetic human beings are forced into these boring, standard-sized boxes, the magic and the art and the beauty of teaching and learning begin to disappear. The freedom of teaching disappears. The professional autonomy vanishes. Minutes are counted and days are spent “covering” materials that have been determined by a school board, rather than an educator.Teachers are no longer allowed to talk about books with children during “reading time” because “there’s not time for that.” I know this, because a couple of years ago, when I was teaching in the very same district you do, I was told (in very black and white terms) by my principal, that I was, “…not allowed to confer with readers individually” on the books they were reading. Not only was I told this, but I was called into his office for a specific and penalizing meeting to receive these direct instructions.In non-educator jargon this meant I was being instructed specifically by my administrator not to talk with my students about the books they were reading. I was not allowed to help them practice their reading strategies in their books or help them find books they liked. I couldn’t ask them questions about their story to help them with their comprehension. I was only allowed to teach from the basal books that came nicely packed in the tidy little boxes from the “district approved” reading program (which was junk to begin with and, not shockingly, is no longer in print).So, dear kindergarten teacher, next fall I pray that you will talk about books with my daughter. I hope you are brave enough to do what’s right, even if pressured to do otherwise. My daughter loves to read. She loves to learn. And what better way for a student to learn than to help her learn how to find and read great and interesting books?It’s not easy for you, and I understand that so completely, but I ask that you continue to find ways to escape the narrow box that you’ve been pushed into.I trust that you will find ways to ensure the students in your class are learning and making progress toward the Common Core standards, and I know you can do this while still having a fun and lively culture of learning echoing through the walls of your classroom.I know that there is a lot of bitterness and resentment that surrounds you. The teachers you work with are tired of being pushed around, and they feel disrespected because their professionalism has been questioned by so many for so long as they continue to be directed to carry out orders, but I ask you very sincerely that you maintain a positive attitude. Please, I know it’s asking a lot, but please stay out of the teacher’s lounge. Their complaining and sour attitudes are contagious, and the little children in your room need a shining and smiling attitude from you, and not the negativity from your peers in the lounge. I hope that your positive attitude can set a tone for others, but the truth is it may not be enough.Instead of spending your precious and very limited alone time during the school day with complacent colleagues, I urge you to seek out those teachers in your building who have a growth mindset.If you can’t find anyone like that in your building (which wouldn’t be too surprising, unfortunately) utilize the power of the internet. Find teachers’ blogs and connect with people on Twitter and Google+ who are passionate about the same things you are and learn with them. The virtual support you receive and the professional learning you engage in with these contacts can be a great source of positive energy, and believe me you’ll need it.There is so much I’ve asked of you, in this letter, and I haven’t even met you yet. You’ve got a big job, the most important job, to educate and nurture our youth, there is no denying the hardships of this job. Keep your head up, and please, remember that my little girl, and I, are counting on you to be the change. I’ve decided to send her to your school, because I have faith in you, her teacher, to make a difference in the status quo and to be remarkable.Very sincerely signed,Erica