The Problem with Twenty Somethings Teachers.It seems as though every time I turn around there is an article floating across a news feed or timeline about how great your Twenties are. ‘Ten great things about being in your Twenties’ or ‘Thirty isn’t the new Twenty: Why your Twenties define your life’, and even ‘How to spend your Twenties figuring out your destiny’. To be transparent, I have thoroughly enjoyed my twenties. I only have three years left to claim that 20–29 box before I join the thirty plus crowd. But as a teacher, being in your twenties can really suck. And before you even think it, this is not a rant about how hard those first few years are as a teacher. We all know they’re really freaking hard. I’m not talking about your first year experience where you go to school with shiny new shoes and gleaming eyes only to come home with bleeding blisters and runny mascara. That portion of your twenties, for a lot of teachers, is relatively small. What, then, about the next 4–8 years of your twenties? What happens after you make it through credentialing, decide that teaching is for you, and stick it out?I have quite a few friends who, like myself, fall into this category of Twenty Something Teachers. I’ve been in the classroom for five years. I’m good at what I do, most days. I’m confident that I’ve made the right choices to put me in the field that I should be in, but now what?Education is one of the few fields remaining where the proverbial ladder doesn't have many lateral entrances and exits. We all start at the bottom and climb. However, for me and many other Twenty Something teachers, we climb and then have to wait. In most school settings the hierarchy of power is pretty simple and clearly defined. At the bottom of the pyramid are classroom teachers; those of us who, day in and day out, teach multiple classes of children every day and truly love our job. On the next tier of the pyramid you have Assistant Principals, Principals, or Heads of School depending on your circle. These are those teachers who have taken the initiative to further their education to become Educational Leaders. They help to run the school and work closely with us Teachers. If you continue up they pyramid you have a smaller group of people who work at the District or Organizational level. Those are the people who make decisions about direction and vision and curriculum. That requires even more education, usually into the multiple Master’s or Doctorate categories. While I have had plenty of opportunity in my Twenties to further my education, I remain with a Bachelor of Arts in Secondary Education. And that’s it. I haven’t pursued an advanced degree because, quite honestly, I don’t know what I want it in. But that’s besides the point.The point is, that for many Twenty Something teachers, both like myself with no advanced degree yet relevant experience, but also for those with advanced degrees and experience, there’s no place for us in the pyramid. We remain in one of the few fields where age still classifies you into categories for opportunity of advancement. I know so many wonderful, battle-hardened, visionary teachers in their Twenties who are qualified for many things, but because they have only been in Education for 5 to 7 years they can’t possibly be qualified to have a voice in how to run a school. So to get down to it, here is a list of things that can suck about being a Twenty Somethings teacher.As a Twenty Something teacher, I am not frequently looked to in a leadership capacity. I’m no department chair because I haven’t been around long enough. I’m no grade level leader because I probably don’t garnish the proper respect from my (older) peers. But, sure, I have no problem taking on administrative duties when my leaders get overwhelmed. I get it; administrators and school leaders have tough jobs with a lot on their plates, unlike me, who, as a classroom teacher, don’t have the same workload. But that’s one of the great things about being in your Twenties right? You aren’t burnt out enough yet to say no, or maybe you’re still hopeful enough for advancement or recognition to say yes. So, of course, I’ll be happy to do the things that I’m really not supposed to do because it’s not in my job description or outside my scope of responsibility, or just because you think I may have more free time. But, why not just bring me to the table and delegate to me up front if you know I’m so willing to do what’s necessary? Oh, wait. It’s because I’m in my Twenties.Oh, those glorious days when Google won’t work or your email isn’t sending, or heaven forbid your iPhone isn’t syncing right. A Twenty something is a hot commodity when there are problems with technology, but wait, you need someone to chair a committee or work on a project? Twenty somethings must scatter like roaches. It’s hard to find Twenty Somethings even in smaller leadership capacities because, on one hand, the assumption is that they can’t handle the responsibility, yet, on the other hand, Twenty Somethings are some of the most adventurous, resourceful people you’ll meet. Want to know how to do something in your Twenties? You go figure it out. You research, you watch, you practice. You connect with others. Learn on your own time and dime. How do you think we learned the mystical ways of Windows 8? We figured it out ourselves. But that skill and drive couldn’t possibly transfer into a leadership role, right?This one in particular is good. Twenty Somethings are always known for their ‘new, flashy’ pedagogy. Twenty Somethings love to do Projects, Design, Remix, Blends, Flips, and just about anything else you can do in a Vitamix, only in their classrooms. Some people see these practices like diseases just waiting to infect others. Look out! Here comes the bottom up content creation! Oh no! Run for your life before you get the Technology bug! A lot of us get the ‘You can do it but keep it to yourself’ talk about our pedagogy of choice. No one really minds what you do in your room, so long as you keep your door closed and don’t taint the lunch conversation. It’s the disruption of the norm and the rocking of the boat that often deter Twenty Somethings from sharing about their work. But it’s funny, to me at least, that those same teachers that people are worried about changing the school climate or practices with new and different things are the ones spending the most time with students outside of the classroom. You’re a Twenty Something? Oh great! Coach our basketball team! Sponsor our Science Fair! Run the MakerSpace! The same practices and principles that stem from their pedagogy often infects the way they interact with students outside of an educational setting, but that is less threatening to those who are afraid of change because it takes it out of their direct line of sight. Twenty Somethings couldn’t really have an impact on students or culture outside of the classroom despite what they do inside of the classroom….or could they?This has truly been one of my favorite parts about being a Twenty Somethings teacher. I have a unique skill set that involves things like Trivia Crack, Snapchat, and Sam Smith that connect me to my students in a way that older teachers usually don’t have. For once, my age is not a barrier but a bridge to my students that allows me to meet them where they are in a lot of different ways. No, this doesn’t necessarily mean they’ll understand nouns or verbs any better because we have similar music tastes, but it does provide a level of trust and understanding that is almost always unspoken but incredibly strong. This bridge allows me to meet them with things like empathy, understanding, compassion, courage, and strength because I really do vividly remember what it was like to be 14, and more importantly than the students can see that I’m not totally out of touch. That’s not to say that other teachers are disconnected, but my connect is infinitely more obvious because of the smaller gap in age and interests. After all, it was only ten-ish years ago that I was in middle school. The Twenty Somethings teachers I know are deeply connected to their students because in many ways in our lives we are more similar than they are different. And, if schools’ primary purpose are to serve and educate students and part of that is understanding who they are, what they want, and what their priorities are, who then is more qualified to help run a school than someone who truly knows their user? Twenty Somethings bring a perspective to the conversation that older teachers have either forgotten or don’t have at all. They connect deeply with their students and have an open dialogue of what they want, and how they feel. Aren’t those integral parts to running a school? And if they aren’t, shouldn’t they be?I know that I won’t always be a Twenty Somethings teacher. I hope I never forget what it feels like, though. And I also hope that when I’m not a Twenty Something, but maybe Thirty Something or a Forty Something that my role as a Twenty Something in education was not wasted. From where I sit, I don’t know what that role is because I’m not sure I want to get that next degree and then wait. There are some people who are comfortable with the ladder, but I’m not one of them. While there are places and schools where the ladder has been redefined and looks more like a Hogwarts’ staircase, where I live and work the ladder is still a thing I have to learn to live with or choose which direction to climb. There aren’t too many roles for us Twenty Somethings other than in my current capacity and I feel as though I haven’t found my fit in Education. But, because I’m a Twenty Something teacher, I can still say that I know that place is meant to be powerful and impacting. Afterall, I haven’t lost that blind optimism, yet.Ah, to be young.