“You just aren’t as good at math as the other students.” It’s something I felt like I had known deep down inside for years but it stung hearing him say it. My parents had pushed me to be in the “Honors” Math classes but I felt like I was living a lie, I sucked at math and my Honors Geometry teacher was the first guy to have the guts to say it to my face.I went home that day defeated. When you’re a teenager you’re learning a lot about yourself and that day I learned that I sucked at Math. I didn’t have the “math gene” and this probably meant that I shouldn’t be in Honors Geometry - I was out of my league.So, like most kids, I told my parents what happened. They told me I could do anything I wanted to do, no teacher can tell me what I am not capable of. But he was right, I knew it, some kids just got Math, I was not one of them.My Dad recommended that I change teachers and stick it out in Honors Geometry. I still didn’t buy it. If I thought I was bad at Math, and my Math teacher thought I was bad at Math…I think that really should make me bad at Math right? That didn’t phase my Dad, instead he petitioned to have my teachers changed, but my High School Geometry teacher didn’t budge, he wouldn’t sign the class change paperwork.That’s when my Dad realized that this teacher was going to make sure I failed geometry, he didn’t want for me to escape, he was taking me down. So my Dad took it a step further and worked it out, I changed teachers and no, I didn’t fail Honor Geometry.In fact, four years later I was at the top of my class taking advanced Calculus as part of my engineering degree at Carnegie Mellon. I ended-up being two classes away from a Math minor when I graduated, needless to say, Math and I worked out our differences.Now back to my geometry teacher. I never was able to follow-up with him, so I’ll do it now, in two paragraphs.Thank you for teaching me a valuable lesson. You did a terrible job of teaching Math, but have taught me a valuable lesson that has forever changed my life. You taught me that even our teachers or people we look up to in our life can be wrong. Sometimes people you think should believe in you won’t. That’s life, nothing will change those people. What can change, is you. I learned that I can be bad at something and later kick-ass at it, I can dislike someone but later learn to appreciate some of their amazing qualities, and most importantly I learned that I can choose who to surround myself with, and I try my best to keep that to positive people.You were a singular poisonous flower in what was otherwise a High School experience filled with fields full of roses. Still, without one poisonous flower, how would I have ever identified all those that have come after it in life? I learned that you were right about Math, it did take me longer than the other kids, but I also learned that with time, I could improve, I could change the way that I learned, and I did. I’m not mad at you because at the end of the day I know that you were only doing your best, it was me who didn’t yet know how to do the best that I could do…Sincerely,Morgan (18 years later)Photo Credit: Akash k via Compfight cc