Defining Expert TeachingBy Vanessa RodriguezThe following is an excerpt from The Teaching Brain, which draws on the science of human development to redefine teaching as an evolutionary cognitive skill that develops in all people over time.Why do we have an entire profession dedicated to something — i.e., teaching — that all humans do naturally?Professional teachers reading this might be angry at the mere suggestion that everyone can (and to some extent does) teach, wary that such a definition carries the potential to reinforce the insulting old adage, “Those who can, do; those who can’t, teach.”Teaching is not a skill that you either have or don’t have. It is not a skill that is stagnant, nor is it a skill that grows and approaches some maximum upper limit that everyone will reach eventually. The teaching skill that is being exhibited in a classroom by an experienced, thoughtful, aware teacher is not at all the same skill exhibited by a toddler, a teenager, or even your average parent. While looking at how children and parents teach can help us see the basic elements and characteristics of teaching, it doesn’t allow for a deep understanding of what a professional expert educator does. What makes an expert teacher?Like learning, teaching is many things at different times and in different people. It’s a skill that develops over time and can be honed to the level of expertise by those with natural ability (all of us), training, experience, and great effort and dedication. In fact, we often argue over whether teaching is a trainable skill or an art form. That’s the wrong argument. It stems from an inadequate definition that equates teaching with a tool for learning: an individual static variable that delivers information to learners. Redefining teaching as a natural human skill that develops over time, as we’ve begun to do, means it is both a trainable skill and an art form, making it similar to many other skilled professions. Not surprisingly, at its onset skill development in teaching appears very trainable. But upon examining the peak of the skill, I have found that it is not nearly as trainable at that level and requires an expert to demonstrate its potential.Learning is a cognitive skill that develops over time. So too is teaching. We don’t “train” kids to learn. It’s true they are trained in their early years to engage in certain behaviors, but as children develop their learning is understood to be more context-dependent. The way they process and understand information becomes more complicated. We don’t expect any learner to know everything all at once, nor should we expect that to be possible for a teacher of any type or level. Learners build skills and understanding over time, deepen their knowledge in subject areas, and eventually progress to integrating their knowledge into other contexts. Similarly, teachers build skills that develop more complexity with the passage of time.The depth and complexity of a teacher’s skills depend on the teacher’s own experience, effort, and interactions with specific contexts. After earning a master’s degree in education (or perhaps attending a summer intensive teacher training workshop), a professional teacher is presumably armed with the basic skills of teaching, including routines, organization, content and skill knowledge, and behavior and time management. But at best this is only the foundation for a skill that will take years of experience, effort, and crafted awareness to develop as an art form that reflects a high level of expert teaching. If the initial training teachers receive — something that comes in many forms and is itself the subject of great controversy — were soil, new teachers would be saplings. Their natural growth process is further facilitated by a variety of internal and external factors that enable them to become trees one day.The skill of teaching, like learning, originates and develops in the brain. Skills that are fundamentally cognitive call upon the brain as the main contributor. In other words, a skill such as playing the piano is not purely a cognitive skill because it also requires physical strength in the fingers. On the other hand, teaching is a set of skills, like learning, that is completely dependent on our brain processing. However, what we haven’t fully integrated into our understanding of teaching (or learning for that matter) are the ripple effects that stem from the dynamic systems in which our brains function.I recently interviewed Bob, a high school teacher, about his process of teaching. He described how he is always “pressing students to generate something with more emotional content or belief.” Sometimes he would even push a student until he or she cried, fully aware that tears could be an outcome of pushing that way. To the casual observer it might seem as if this teacher lacked sensitivity and was incapable of exhibiting empathy toward his learners. However, Bob explained it quite differently. When he gets to the point where he knows tears are likely, he’s already carefully evaluated the student’s learning brain and decided that “they are not giving [their all] because they are afraid of something.” As he put it, “They’re thinking, ‘What do the other kids want to hear? What does the teacher want to hear?’ Everything but what they want to say, because their opinions have never been valued.”Bob pointed out that safely and gently pushing a student to expose genuine emotion, even if it brings the student to tears, is needed because that’s when the wall holding a student back has been broken down and now the student is free. Bob believes that if this wall isn’t broken down, he’s not doing his job.Often we associate the experience of breaking down an emotional wall with help or coaxing from someone we trust with other significant life challenges. We have little trouble seeing such an experience as a sign of growth, development, and even acceptance. Bob learned that this type of growth is no less important in the classroom, and as an expert teacher he made it his business to find each student’s wall and prompt the student to knock it down.Though bringing a student to tears certainly would not work for everyone, and I would not suggest that we label it a best practice or promote it in teacher training, it’s clear that Bob recognized his strategy as something that worked for him in particular interactions with certain types of learners. More important, it highlights the differences in complexity and multilevel cognitive processing that is specific to humans and our unique teaching capabilities.Bob is right — kids have walls. And so do teachers. These walls hold us back from achieving our true potential. Some of us learn how to take those walls down, some find ways to climb over them, and others just live behind them and cope. Maybe you remember being a student with a wall. Perhaps a teacher came along — in third, fifth, seventh, or tenth grade — who helped you figure out a way to see that the wall existed and, in time, helped you figure out how to take it down. As a classroom teacher, I always hoped that my students knew my aim was to work with them, helping them become aware of their walls so we could work together on bringing them down.Malik hung around after class had been let out on the last day of school. Field day and graduation were still to come, but this was the last official academic class. He often lagged behind the others and I would have to nudge him to “get it together” or “get a move on,” but this day was different. I could tell from his body language. He was being quiet in a way that was very different from his typical nature. He sheepishly came over to me, handed me a piece of folded paper, and said, “Read it after graduation.”Zoë was another student who stands out in my memory. I had decided to work at a different school the upcoming year, and my seventh graders weren’t exactly happy to learn that I wouldn’t be around during their much-anticipated eighth-grade year, when they would finally be seniors, at least in middle school terms.On the last day of school Zoë handed me a black folder that she’d hand-decorated with glitter hearts. I smiled as I opened the folder and saw a three-page typed letter decorated with more glitter hearts. This was all very Zoë, who was petite, charming, and generally in a chipper mood. But I was surprised by the content of the letter. Zoë began by going through a list of what had happened to her throughout the year and what she had learned. None of it was about the subject we’d been studying, even though her scores on state exams had increased significantly. Instead she wrote about loss, hurt, and happiness.Written almost five years apart, these letters reflect my emerging awareness that in order to motivate students, I needed to pay attention to who they were. I had to create a relationship and let them know that I knew something about them. I had to reach them. While there were no doubt other students with whom I was not so successful, I had reached Zoë and Malik — two students who couldn’t be more different from each other. They were of different genders, races, cultures, religions, and socioeconomic classes. They came from neighborhoods that were worlds apart, and their personalities were equally distinct. But my teaching brain was beginning to focus on who each individual learner was, to integrate the various dimensions of that child’s distinctive constitution, and to draw out the features of the student’s background most salient in his or her worldview.All teachers want to advance their students’ learning, and expert teachers understand the work that must be done on the social, emotional, and intellectual levels to make this happen. The expert teacher helps students see themselves and connect with themselves for a sound foundation on which to build up students’ content-specific knowledge and skills.This is what makes expert teachers masters at their craft. They are not counselors, therapists, best friends, or parents. Expert teachers support learning by using scaffolding, motivation, and a continued understanding of the holistic needs of their learners. They do their best to create the ideal mental and physical environment for their students’ learning. Parents do this too, but the primary difference between expert teachers and great parents is that expert teachers plan to do this through deliberate and analytical means. They explicitly design and carry out this plan in order to achieve precise educational goals. Intentional in design, the application of the plan and any necessary revisions are based on the interactions between the expert teacher and the learner.First, the simple definition: expert teachers are systems thinkers. That seems simple enough, no? Well, perhaps not. As previously noted, a dynamic system has many variables. Each variable is constantly interacting with other variables within the system, as well as with those belonging to other systems. They are all affected by and affect one another. Dynamic systems are at once independent and interdependent. It’s like the stock market. Individual stocks affect one another, influencing the performance of the stock market. In turn, the market, along with a number of other factors, wields influence on the overall economy. Even a person who doesn’t have money invested directly in the stock market will in some way be affected by shifts in the market, via contact with things and people that do have direct connections to the market — say, the butcher where he gets his meat or the store where he buys his sneakers.How markets and economies work can be confusing to many of us, but not to everyone. Traders on the floor, hedge fund managers, and millions of others understand the market thoroughly. They weren’t born with that understanding and in all likelihood they still hadn’t developed it after studying it in school; it’s generally during their first year of work in that arena that they begin to develop a sense of how the overall system works. Newbie traders learn the parts of the system, are taught how to understand it, and practice within it. Over time, these newbies — and others regularly engaged with the market for one reason or another — come to understand the larger system as a whole. All of those numbers on the electronic ticker tape flying across the bottom of the TV screen or flashing in Times Square actually make sense to a number of people. While many of us may walk past those numbers without a second thought, there are people, corporations, and countries basing decisions on them every day because of the messages they have learned to decode within the financial system.Systems thinking goes beyond the awareness of a learner’s academic capacity and social or emotional needs. It allows teachers to tap into cognitive skills that recognize the learner as an independent and complex system. Expert teachers recognize the variables that contribute to the learner’s system of understanding and then manage the patterns they create. They keep these patterns in mind in order to make key teaching decisions and in order to adjust their interactions with the learner in a way that will help the student learn more effectively. Redefining teaching in this way, especially expert teaching, leaves open the possibility that less-than-optimal teaching-learning interactions may be a reflection of a teacher’s interpretation of a student’s learning system just as much as or even more than a reflection of that student’s learning system itself.Peeling back yet another layer of the dynamic system, in order to recognize the student as an individual the expert teacher must also recognize him- or herself as an independent system affecting the student. This recognition of the reciprocal effect between teacher and learner helps the expert teacher to design appropriate interventions that target both the teacher and the learner, to meet the needs and goals of the learner.Like any other mindful human interaction, teaching is about sensing information around you, processing that information in your mind, and then delivering an appropriate response. In order to teach effectively, one must focus on how we process the information as both a teacher and learner. The classroom teacher who is an expert earns that distinction because of how she has thoughtfully chosen to develop her teaching awarenesses.Vanessa Rodriguez taught humanities in the New York City public schools for more than ten years before deciding to return to graduate school in pursuit of understanding exactly what — beyond her love of children — inspires her love of teaching. She is now a doctoral candidate at the Harvard Graduate School of Education, where her research has been recognized for its innovation and potential impact on education with the prestigious Harvard Initiative for Learning and Teaching (HILT) award. She is the author, with Michelle Fitzpatrick, of The Teaching Brain: The Evolutionary Trait at the Heart of Education (The New Press). A New Yorker at heart, she currently lives in Cambridge, Massachusetts.Illustrations by Rob PybusBright is made possible by funding from the New Venture Fund, and is supported by The Bill &amp; Melinda Gates Foundation. Bright retains editorial independence.