Two months ago I was just a public school Spanish teacher. Today, I am a public school teacher who happens to work for a mobile app startup called Naow. You may be wondering: How did a 20-something with a degree in liberal arts and Master’s in secondary education end up working for a tech startup? And how do, if any, of his skills translate into an environment full of nerdy, techie geeks? What can two seemingly polar worlds learn from each other?Maxime, the CEO of Naow, and I met through a mutual friend while he was studying Interactive Design at Parson’s. After finishing school, he started working on his new mobile app, Naow. I was starting my sixth-year as a teacher. As any teacher does in the initial weeks of teaching, I expressed a little discontent with respect to my job. I told Max that I felt like I had a skillset that was being underutilized. Within 24 hours, Max offered me part-time work as Community Manager. I enthusiastically accepted and started the same week.My initial impressions of Naow were largely positive. They had a novel idea, a team of talented individuals, and an eagerness to create a novel mobile experience. From the product’s perspective, they were in good shape—they had a functioning MVP and attractive design. But when our initial users began testing the app, we saw holes in its design.So I started to think to myself: sometimes I create lessons that I think are going to go great. I spend hours collecting resources, walking through every step of the lesson. And then it bombs, and of course, I blame the students. Maxime and Naow’s CPO, Solène, were experiencing the same thing I was, albeit in a different environment.Sometimes we have a hard time letting go of things we spend so much time creating. Instead of trying to understand where the breakdown is, we place blame where it doesn’t belong. In working with Naow, I realized that my job was to offer a fresh perspective to a team that sometimes was a bit short-sighted by their emotional attachment to their product (after all, both Co‑founders are French).It’s been a few weeks now that we’ve been working together and we’ve learned a lot in this short time. Below are a few of our takeaways in working with each other:Users don’t care about the backend, the technical challenges you face, or even that new flat design trend. They only care about the features of a product, and they won’t be nice with your app—if it does not solve any problem for them, they simply won’t use it.Being that I don’t know the first thing about coding or design, I don’t quite understand what the implications are for the coder or designer to make changes to the app. That being said, listen to the feedback of your users even though it may mean that you may have to throw away some of the things you spent countless hours on. Don’t get stuck on an idea just because you have already invested so much time into it—if it doesn’t work for the user, it doesn’t work.Teachers plan their curriculum using a design principle known as backwards design. It requires the teacher to think about the learning objectives prior to planning the lessons and creating assessments. Although during the course of the semester I make adjustments to my instructions, I always have to make sure my end goals are in mind.Part of my initial work with Naow was to create a mission statement that clarified Naow’s values with respect to its culture, users’ experience, and business model. We published them on a simple Trello board to be viewed by the team at anytime. These are particularly handy when we are considering the next iteration of the product. Considering that apps sometimes go through so many iterations, you may feel yourself getting lost. Step back once in a while and ground yourself in the purpose that your app serves.Also known by the acronym KISS, this principle is touted by the startup world. Trying to add too many features to an app, especially in the early stages, only frustrates the design team and confuses the user. Keep in mind that many of the apps that are currently on the market have already been on the market for a number of years, and have thus had the time to add more features.If you are a Community Manager, don’t feel the need to communicate every piece of user feedback to the design team. Quantify all this feedback and report patterns instead. Like my students, users have a lot to say. It is important to think holistically about the feedback and pick a few ideas to share with the team that could have a lot of leverage for the app’s functionality. To this end—the feedback that the design team receives is simple and actionable. So don’t get to excited, we won’t be creating an app that will teleport you to the moon anytime soon, just like my students won’t be watching the newest Hunger Game’s movie just because it’s Friday and that we could put Spanish subtitles.Initially, I was a bit worried to be too frank with the Naow’s team. After all, my relationship with the CEO was that of a friend. I quickly realized that the team was ready to hear what I had to say and very willing to not just hear me, but make changes to their app as a result. I’ve worked with four principals at this point in my career. My principals who gave me the most honest and frequent feedbacks were the ones I respected most— and as a result, my instruction improved most with them. If you feel like there are features that aren’t working, communicate that to your team. It is likely that any doubts that you have will manifest at a later time anyways, when costs will be much higher. And if your team is a little stuffy, take ‘em out for happy hour, buy them a few rounds, and then offer them a little piece of your mind.Even though this last piece of advice maybe has more to do with my friendship with Max, I believe these four tips will help cultivate effective working relationships with people from diverse backgrounds in the startup community.So in the end, why does a teacher with a literary degree belong in a tech startup? Let’s connect the dots: As part of Naow, my job is that of a teacher, but under the auspices of Community Manager. As Community Manager, my responsibility is to assess the experience that the user has with the app (lesson) and their concept of it, and communicate that to the design team in order for them to make changes to the user interface (adjusting instruction). As such, my job as a Community Manager and Spanish teacher are, in the end, one in the same. That’s where I come in. Mr. Bolduc. Spokesperson of the user. Señor connector of two polar worlds.