By Eric WestendorfIn the spring of 1997 in New York City, IBM’s chess-playing computer, Deep Blue, took on Russian grandmaster Garry Kasparov in a rematch of their 1996 match. In the sixth and decisive game of the match, Deep Blue unexpectedly sacrificed his knight and pulled Kasparov into a trap. Less than twenty moves into the game, Kasparov was forced to resign.It was a watershed moment. A machine had outsmarted the world’s greatest chess player.If the industrial revolution infinitely multiplied the power of our muscles, the technological revolution infinitely multiplied the power of our minds. And the tech revolution is far from over; today’s machines are far more powerful than Deep Blue was in 1997.When Deep Blue beat Kasparov, it was an academic question. Few schools had access to the internet or affordable devices. That has changed in the last five years: 92% of schools have high speed internet access today, and in the next five years the Federal E-Rate program will spend over $8 billion to ensure that 99% of students have broadband access. Meanwhile, competition among Chromebooks, iPads, and Kindles is pushing down the cost of devices. Technology will soon be ubiquitous in schools.With the pipes in place, we’re confronted with the implications of Deep Blue’s 1997 victory. If a machine can beat a chess master, can it also “beat” a teacher?Imagine. Instead of a teacher leading twenty-five students through the same learning experience, each student follows a unique learning path laid out by a machine; a machine that reads each student’s moves and uses an algorithm like Deep Blue’s to deliver a customized response.There’s just one problem with this paradigm. It’s wrong.It’s not that machines won’t play a role in reshaping the way a classroom looks. They will. And it’s not that students won’t spend more time looking at screens in school. They will.The problem is that our paradigm for thinking about the role of machines is stunted. To understand why, we need only look back to Deep Blue. It turns out that there is another chapter to the story.In his book, “The Innovators,” Walter Isaacson chronicles a chess competition that took place almost ten years after Kasparov’s defeat. This time, human-machine teams were allowed to compete with the grandmasters and super computers like Deep Blue. The results were decisive. The winners were a team of two American amateurs who used three computers. According to Kasparov, “Their skill at manipulating and coaching their computers to look very deeply into positions effectively counteracted the superior chess understanding of their grandmaster opponents and the greater computational power of other participants [the machines].”It turns out that humans and machines have complementary skills. Kasparov’s unique genius lay in his ability to read his opponent and his creativity. Deep Blue’s strength came from its brute-force computational power. It was capable of evaluating 200,000,000 positions per second.And, let’s not forget that we are talking about chess, a game that could be described as the quintessential big data problem. Most challenges — including educating a human being — are not big data problems. They rely heavily on our unique human ability to empathize, interpret, and make meaning from the behavior of other humans.Abraham Verghese, Professor for the Theory and Practice of Medicine at Stanford University Medical School, highlights the unique power of the human hand to diagnose, treat, and comfort patients.“When we shortcut the physical exam,” said Verghese in a 2011 TED talk, “when we lean towards ordering tests instead of talking to and examining the patient, we not only overlook simple diagnoses that can help us treat at an early stage, we lose a ritual; a ritual that I believe is transformative, transcendent, and is at the heart of the patient-physician relationship.”The unique power of humans will always be central to education. Machines will not replace the intuition, the creativity, the role-modeling, the sparkle-in-the-eye, or the look that communicates, “I believe in you,” that only humans can bring.The paradigm of the future will be that of symbiosis — human and machine working together.Imagine. This time a teacher leads a community of students through a combination of group challenges and individual tasks. She shares models of excellence with the class, using her device to project images onto their individual devices. The students talk in small groups, working on their drafts and consulting each other and the teacher when they need feedback. The teacher sees their progress in person and on her device. Moving around the classroom, she gets recommendations for next steps from her machine. She diagnoses and recommends; diagnoses and recommends. As the classroom buzzes with activity, she slides into a seat next to a student who is looking frustrated. Catching her eye, she puts her hand on her shoulder and says, “Talk to me about where you’re stuck.”Bright is made possible by funding from the New Venture Fund, and is supported by The Bill &amp; Melinda Gates Foundation. Bright retains editorial independence.