Teachers in New York earn 90% more than in South DakotaThe Top and the BottomChanging StatesChanging teacher salaries are leaving some states behind.Note from author: as some readers have pointed out, our first revision of this chart had figures only adjusted using the Consumer Price Index. We have now adjusted this using 2013 U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis’ Price Parities by State as well. As such, the original title is no longer true, though teachers in Massachusetts earn 50% more than South Dakota.Share this on Twitter &gt;Last week we published a chart showing which countries paid teachers the highest and lowest. The United States ranked 9th on the list of OECD countries, showing that American teachers earn a high starting salary and reach near their maximum earning potential at 15 years experience. To compare teacher salaries by state, we used data compiled by the National Center for Education Statistics. The data shows that the national average teacher salary in the United States is $56,383 in current dollars (at the time of the study).At the top of the list Massachussetts teachers on average earn a salary of over $67,000 annually, nearly 50% higher than teachers in the lowest-earning state South Dakota. The Northeast United States, along with California and Alaska rank the highest among teacher salaries, whereas Central and Southern states rank lowest.Wyoming, North Dakota, and Massachusetts have demonstrated the largest positive increase in teacher salaries, though North Dakota remains in the bottom quarter of annual earnings at just over $47,000. The most unchanged states include South Dakota and Kansas with less than a 1% change.North Carolina noted the largest negative change, where teacher salaries have decreased by nearly 15% between the school years of 1999–2000 and 2012–2013.Constant dollars based on the Consumer Price Index (CPI), prepared by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, adjusted to a school-year basis. The CPI does not account for differences in inflation rates.Source: National Education Association, Estimates of School Statistics, 1969–79 through 2012–13.Table 211.60: Estimated average annual salary of teachers in public elementary and secondary schools, by state: Selected years, 1969–70 through 2012–13Chalk.com puts the right tools in teacher’s hands to create truly personalized learning.Admins — Get a free demonstration of Chalk.com for your school today &gt;Teachers — Sign up for Chalk.com for FREE &gt;