Idle Confessions of a Teacher Trying Something New“I turn around/ It’s fear/ I turn around again/ And it’s love.” — Laurie Anderson20 years into my teaching career, I am embarking on what I feel is the third and perhaps last act.The first 10 years, I was more or less a normal teacher — I taught units, I had fidelity to the curriculum. By the end, though, I sensed things were not quite right — I felt a pull to question and move away from units and try something different.The next 10, I front-loaded all the curriculum into the first 1/3 of the year, and used the last 2/3 to return to it in ways that created meaning. This liberated the students and me from many things: units, due dates, even the compulsion to learn. Standardized test scores ended up high, which was deemed necessary in order for me to justify not following the curriculum pacing guide or anyone or anything in the 2nd part of the year. Students were motivated to “learn for themselves”, challenged to wring out personal lessons from whatever we were doing in class instead of being compelled to learn for an exam. It worked; I was into it, the kids were into it, and that pairing is really important.But still, there was a pull. Kids were learning for themselves, but under my constructs still. I felt the need to go further. Once again, in August, I worked in a frenzy.This year I was prepared for the following: In my class, students would have 3 choices: Learn the curriculum (online video lessons for each objective, tests, quizzes), do an activity that previews/reviews said curriculum (like what I had going on the 2nd part of the year before), or work on an independent study. Every day they make the choice, with stipulations being they had to “finish the curriculum” by the end of the year, and finish 3 independent studies.This is my third act.Parents balked at this enough at the start of the year so that I pulled back, “did the curriculum” the 1st part of the year like usual and had the other two choices for the 2nd.I finally just started the 2nd part of the year. And I’m afraid it won’t work.I’m afraid that I won’t be able to pull it off. I’m afraid that I won’t have sufficient time to spend with everyone, coaching them through at least the first part of this. I’m afraid I haven’t predicted all the difficulties along the way. I’m afraid that my students won’t enjoy it the way I want them to. I’m afraid I’ll micromanage it and turn it into just another “hoop-jumping” experience for them.The students are afraid as well. They don’t really know what they’re supposed to do. They don’t have a clear picture of how they’re going to be graded, and neither do I. They can’t see in their mind’s eye what they’re supposed to produce, and they know I’m not sure either.Teachers deal with this fear differently. I have a friend who makes rubrics out of fear of the outcome of a project. Apparently, I make posters and hang them in my room — here are two:There are several more just like these, hanging. I don’t know if they will ever be useful to anyone, but they made me feel a little better, and they’re not in the way…Halfway down the first poster here, there’s an interplay between fear and love. I’m interested in this relationship — I wonder just how closely related they are. Is it that love fights against fear, or is there something else? Just thinking now — without love, there is no fear, is there? So love can be seen as both the progenitor and the antagonist of fear? Love makes what it later destroys?How many classic stories are predicated on just this motif? It seems like many of the big ones, from Greek myths to Frankenstein to Star Wars. But the real question for teachers is this: what does this motif have to do with what you do in class?For me, I imagine that I have constructed my own fears this year from my love of something, be it teaching, or the kids, or something. If I didn’t feel this love, I wouldn’t have tried all this stuff out; I would have blithely gone through my career without fear. Fear is the forensic evidence that love exists.Thanks for bearing with me through this rambling entry. It doesn’t really have a point; I just needed to get some things out. If you made it this far in this entry, you are truly gracious. If this is the first thing you’ve read from me, I promise that my other publications are more focused. Enjoy your day!