Rumah GadangGedung MederkaMr. Ridwan KamilIndonesia, another location featured in my upcoming novel, is a diverse nation known for its varied cultural influences, multitude of ethnic groups and active volcanoes. From the Islamic era, to the Dutch colonization, to the anti imperialistic movement/sentiment during the Cold War to its current pro Western stance, Indonesia has gone through many ideological and cultural transformations, and these waves of change are clearly visible in its architecture. For this post, let’s highlight Rumah Gadang’s, the historic Gedung Mederka, and Mr. Ridwan Kamil.A Rumah Gadang (also known as a “Big House”) is a traditional style home native to the Minangkabau (an ethnic group with origins in the province of West Sumatra in Indonesia. In line with the matrilineal side of Minangkabau culture, these homes are owned and passed down between mother and daughter over the generations. Rumah Gadang’s are most commonly known for their dramatic curved roofs and symbolic designs/motifs that cover their external walls. These structures are traditionally used for family meetings and ceremonial activities.The Gedung Mederka (Mederka Building) is a historic landmark in Bandung, Indonesia most noted as being the venue for the 1955 Asia-Africa Conference. Originally called the Sociëteit Concordia (the Sociëteit Concordia was the social center used to host dances, theatrical performances and other forms of entertainment for the Dutch elite in Bandung at the time), it was redesigned and reconstructed from its original state by the Dutch architect Wolff Schoemaker in partnership with Albert Frederik Aalbers in 1926. The building would go on to become a centerpiece of the Indonesian nationalist movement against both the Dutch and Japanese occupations. After Indonesia achieved independence from Japan (1945) and the Netherlands (1949), the building was renovated by the Indonesian government specifically for the purpose of hosting the Bandung Conference of 1955. Today it serves as a museum for the Asian-African Conference.Ridwan Kamil is a respected architect in Indonesia who is also currently serving as the mayor of Bandung. He is the founder of the architecture design firm, Urbane Indonesia, and his company is involved with numerous local projects in Indonesia, and also been involved in international projects in China and beyond.What are your thoughts on architecture in Indonesia? Please your thoughts/responses on the post, I would love to read them.Indonesia is one of many locations featured in my novel, Eteka: Rise of the Imamba. Be sure to follow this publication via the prompt below for more great posts on architecture around the world!NEW YORK CITY. LIBERIA. CONGO. GUINEA-BISSAU. MOROCCO. NIGERIA. LONDON/ENGLAND. SOUTH-AFRICA. GHANA. ALGERIA. INDONESIA. DETROIT/MICHIGAN. TANZANIA. ETHIOPIA