“Rain, House, Eternity: Presence and Expression in Game Architecture”A series of evenly spaced, grey columns stretch into the distance. At my the periphery of my vision these seem to dissolve into the background. I pause, gazing up; the rain falls with a muted, patient rhythm. While I know where this space is prompting me — upwards, to my character’s death -, I remain somehow comforted. The rain, the grey columns, the dissolving horizon. The architecture of altgames designer Kitty Horrorshow’s Rain, House, Eternity draws me forward. Everything is shaped by it.*Somewhere else. A thick band of light disperses — it does not fall, or penetrate, or burn — through a monumental portal in the side of the building. The round pool of light that it spills drapes the edge of its warm circumference against the massive, rose-brown inner wall. Standing, on one of the many sets of stairs above the hall, I hold my breath; it is a deeply calming and human interior, but also one that is undeniably magnificent — monumental — in its scale. It might be a cathedral. But it isn’t.The building is Louis Kahn’s Jatiyo Sangshad Bhaban in Bangladesh (1961–1982), the final commission the Estonian-born American architect would undertake before his death in 1974. Kahn, described as the “master of pure form”, had transformed the possibilities of Modern architecture by updating and drawing influence directly from Greek and Roman architectural form, which he’d studied in the 1950s and experienced first hand during a series of hugely influential European tours. Kahn’s use of form, his organisation of massive, geometrical structural compositions, was — however — not simply the arrangement of “blocks” in space. For Kahn, light was the essential component that gave form its presence. As he himself argued -Thomas Schielke glosses Kahn’s philosophy — that “light is the maker of material, and material’s purpose is to cast a shadow”. The design behind all this manipulation of mass and light was to produce these intense and almost spiritual encounters within architectural spaces. From the the 2013 exhibition of Kahn’s work at the Vitra Design Museum: “large volumes affect people’s behaviour and how moving from a large to a small volume and into communal spaces impacts upon our emotions.” But it is also about being able to read the building (that it does not hide its bigness, its weight). Using bigness not to belittle, intimidate or oppress, but to honour and empower. Kahn’s architecture creates momentous and significant encounters that remain, despite their volume, still deeply personal and emotive.So the typologies of Kahn’s architecture make concerted and sustained use of large, symmetrical forms — the Phillips Exeter Academy Library, the Salk Institute, CA, the Indian Institute of Management in Ahmedabad. Large, massed blocks and series of blocks are intercut with angles and vitalities of line that cast beguiling columns and diffusions of light. They generate shadow, making components of the building seem to appear and disappear, as if light has itself become an architectural material. Unlike contemporary Modernists, however, Kahn utilised both traditional construction materials (such as brick) and innovative, reinforced frames to support his consciously load-bearing, weighty buildings. Unlike the International Modernists, he was not producing airy, light-filled, glassy spaces. Spaces which attempted to deny their own materiality. He was saying; form is mass. For Kahn, this was about a ‘form toward presence’. And like any presence, it relies on an encounter.Videogames are not constrained by Newtonian physics. A building can cantilever, bend, levitate, and support volumes of weight and pressure that regular building materials simply cannot. But for Kahn, the limitations of a material were one of the primary considerations that an architectural student must bear first in mind — “brick wants to be arch”. It cannot be anything else. The architect must respect that. Video game designers — on the other hand — do not have to take such concerns so seriously.But to argue that games designers are indifferent to these architectural lessons is misleading. To look specifically at freeware and altgames, there’s a lot of work on display that seems to make similar arguments to Kahn, to be cast — as it were — in his shadow. Freeware games so often create — within limited and compressed means — these very affective, Expressionist game spaces which are supercharged with emotion, feelings of awe, a sense of a profound encounter. They are about experimentation, about feeling and response in non-narrative and abstract environments. So, if freeware designers acknowledge and prioritise feeling, then it’s necessary that they also think about how to achieve and prompt that feeling, of how to utilise space to convey these emotional, reflective, and even political imaginations. To create improbable, ‘non-functional’ masses which deepen and extend our emotional, psychological, and intellectual experience of a game. In architecture, this might stem from a building’s program, its concept and the designed organization of that concept. For theorist Bernard Tschumi, the visitor will always invariably encounter not simply the space but the programmed space in what he called an “intense confrontation”. This constitutes an “intrusion” which stems from one “order” entering into another one. The subject/player is not simply acted upon, or struck down in awe. Such mesmerizing experiences in space can still be — must be — one of confrontation.Rain, House, Eternity isn’t the only of Horrorshow’s games to work through architecture. But it is the one which is most demonstrably spatial and reflective in the vein of Louis Kahn. It is a work created specifically for the ADAF 2015 panel on Emergent Architectures in digital arts. Its pallette, use of form, and transitions between “levels” of space (we’re basically ascending a singular “tower” of distinct but connected structures), each create particular configurations of architectural mass and procession which centre the architectural experience. It is not subordinate to the linguistic or narrative path of the game, but is — rather — mutually interdependent with it. As we ascend the areas, and engage with its environment to activate text and objects, we’re also unfolding (within) the architectural space around us. There is something particularly relevant here to Kahn’s observation that “Architecture appears for the first time when the sunlight hits a wall. The sunlight did not know what it was before it hit a wall.”Horrorshow creates continuities between the landscape and the concentration of built form, indicating that they coexist (a building in a grey plane), but also highlighting that architectures are necessarily “what nature cannot make” (again, Kahn). The path toward “death” is also a path of obscuration and clarification — the architecture emerges around us from “level 1” (as it were), to ascending the body of the “house” of rain. The first structure that we encounter, walking forwards through a land of muted and grey hills and trees, is a flight of wide grey stairs which lead to a raised platform, with a portico of columns at its head. I won’t say “door”, because door implies a kind of necessary cut made in an otherwise coherent surface to enable movement between spaces — like an afterthought. To treat an entranceway itself as a consistent, meaningful part of the design is very Kahn. It draws attention to the act of ‘entry’, but also underscores the significance of contrasts between inside and outside, that which is in shadow and that light. In Rain, House, Eternity, an encounter with its architecture is necessarily significant and meaningful. It does it very plainly, and with very constrained resourcing.Such mass and un-mass spaces create symphonies of emotional encounter and reflection; mass is not simply ‘supermassive thingness’, not just blank, overwhelming size, but the interplay between size and un-size, between presence and absence. Kahn’s architecture is so affecting precisely because it deploys bigness so as to allude to what is not big, and is ungraspable. Even — spiritual. We can look at the work of Czech scenographer Josef Svoboda, whose sets had a ready and considerate understanding of deployed, proportionate mass and its interaction with light. Svoboda’s set is still powerful, still almost overwhelming. But it also rejoices, and reveals. We are encouraged to confront it, because its “bignesses” are scaled and proportionate, yet not singularly “graspable”. It communicates while refusing to communicate everything.To compare Svoboda’s scenography (above) with the stairways, use of shadow, mutedness, and tensions between revelation and obscuration in Horrorshow’s work demonstrates a keen understanding of the theatricality and “bigness” of their work and its intimacies with the individual player. Such spaces draw on the formal components of the auditorium, entrance way, arena, and ‘room’, but distort them to create tensions and resonances. Bigness does not necessarily mean clarity, nor does it mean oppression. It creates a sort of process of gradual revelation and reflection, just as Rain, House, Eternity leads the player through space using shining, purple “keys” or game items, and proportional, “classical” spaces, but also manipulates and deranges their composition and configuration to promote exploration and meandering, amplifying the unfolding of a message across our screen — “I WAS BROUGHT HERE JUST AS YOU”. This is of course not a “joyous” or glad space, but it is not horrifying, not “fearful”. The scaling and configuration of architectural components intrigues and draws us forward, promoting questions rather than silencing them. It is certainly a confrontation, but one that is negotiated rather than destructive. We feel wrapped rather than crushed. Here we return to Tschumi’s idea of “intrusion” and “intense confrontion”, in which the program of architecture and the experiencing subject are always necessarily encountering one another in ‘tension’. Which order is dominating the other, or are they in balance? In Horrorshow’s games, we always find ourselves attempting to encounter and achieve balance with a spatial order which dominates yet mesmerizes us. Are we rapt in enjoyment, or fear? I think this ambiguity, this tension, is key to Horrorshow’s work. This is a ‘controlled order’ which we have imposed into. Its serenity remains both eternal and continually renegotiated by our presence.Practically, the opportunity to actually realise dynamic, soft shadow and to vary the quality and behaviour of light is an increasingly plausible one. Soft baked shadows can be built using Unity 5, so you can give depth and softness to the dark spaces that building components cast without having to drop massive processing power on it. This doesn’t just make it ‘more real’, but heightens the emotional reaction to an environment that the player has beyond these very bifurcated and obvious dark / light / dark contrasts. It heightens and extends the player’s awareness of graduations and alterations in form. Such spaces become — more gentle, and yet also more mysterious. In one “level”, we wander among these impossible apartment-like blocks with entrance ways we cannot reach, platforms like crazed pavements attaching and detaching from their forms. But it is still, and seemingly “inevitable”. What could feel alien and uncomfortable instead feels only calm. We tread carefully not for fear of encountering something unpleasant, but out of a kind of quietude, or reverence for the architecture.Horrorshow’s worlds are specifically architectural, mesmerising, thoughtful. I read this very good overview of her work recently by Lana Polansky, which exactly hit on those suggestions — that for Horrorshow, games design is a way of better articulating the kind of narrative, literary problems they were frustrated with in pure writing. To create a kind of complex, mesmeric place making. The “ancient structure” you ascend in the game is really a series of mass(ive) spaces in which the player is actually quite tiny and precious. These big environments might seem threatening, but actually they chime and align really acutely with the kind of quiet tension that the game represents — you’re ascending the structure to meet some kind of “release” or end. Towards “mortality”. But the structures, which could seem threatening, don’t — in their bigness, and in the way that Horrorshow makes use of a slow dissolve to occlude and gradually reveal the distances, what is created is actually a very mesmeric, atmospheric largeness. You don’t feel threatened so much as stung into reverie and mysterious consideration. It is sad, but not horrifying.So when you arrive on this large, grey platform — heading toward “mortality” -, you’re surrounded by massive pillars and a baked, hazy fog which obscures the end of your path. But rather than being frightening, it’s actually compelling, and spatially very smart. You’re reassured, and the world around you feels suddenly almost inevitable. It is hard, but also very soft. Like Kahn, Horrorshow knows exactly how to space and proportion the columns and how to gradient and disperse shadow. It fulfills Eve Golden Wood’s argument that they are producing a kind of “horror without fear”. I see similar considerations in games like Homeland, ARTIFACT (created for the recent #mystjam), and Titan Souls — spaces designed to articulate grandeur and reflection to which the game is actually congruent. Not backdrops, not “atmospheres”, but actual spaces. These are games which trouble their own “functionalism”, where form is not reduced to or separated from “sign”. They cohabit.Such sites articulate that there is considerable space for discussions of balance, mood, emotion, mass and space, and that these are already being prioritised by game designers who are less concerned about appealing to conventional game tropes and mechanics, and don’t see architecture in games simply as a kind of “backdrop”. They are operating within smaller teams, often alone, and without commercial pressures (beyond, that is, needing to eat and rest). These considerations open out the architectural languages and potentials of level design as an architectural practice, because the ‘wow’ factor isn’t going to be delivered by major set pieces or the player’s ability to destruct scenery, or to recognise its ‘realness’. Instead, they are more considerate of the overall mood, aesthetics and experience in the moment of encounter within an architectural space and of the “environment” as an architectural one. It was about designing buildings not simply to fulfill functions or to ‘fill space’, but to create specific, immersive and reflective effects. In Rain, House, Eternity, this comes when the first flight of stairs appear from the floor, or from when you at last approach the “altar” and thus the game’s end.Space implies a kind of neutral organisation within a particular plane, and while that’s true from a design perspective, it’s not as true architecturally, when you’re beginning to think about shaping and manipulating space by making these interventions in it. I love that impulse in Lilith’s games, like Crypt Worlds, because there’s a conscious use of very confined junk space and these larger, very raw, heavy geometries to create effective and emotionally affective spaces. Like the tunnels in the crypts, before the burger joint, and these low, shadowy corridors which draw out this kind of Doom memory and despite being very scary, are also quite beguiling and surprising and significant. You’re intrigued on by them because the space exactly reproduces the game and what the game is. It’s a congruence that’s also really meaningful, and very appropriate. This was something Zolani Stewart recently commented about on Twitter, saying “Things I want from videogames: less pretty back scenery and vistas, more purposeful, willfull architecture that asserts its presence”. Horrorshow typifies, and excels, within a typology of virtual architectural practice that absolutely achieves these ends.And this is important, this “assertion”. If public institutions increasingly favour the airy and the visibly “non-present”, this only heightens their shallowness and the argument that such institutions are indeed becoming less graspable, more fragile (at a time when public arts funding is being cut, for example). In a parallel vein, the “Tiny House Movement”, which celebrates an ideology which “embraces individualistic notions of property” and disappearance (from the Social world), can be contrasted to the Massive structures of housing projects such as Vienna’s Democratic Socialist Engelsplatz, built in 1933, to serve a consciously social, democratic function which embraced what Owen Hatherley has called a “true workerism” — a Full Employment that was achieved by involving a seemingly unnecessary number of artisans and workers to contribute to the project. The “Tiny House” movement and the prefabricated International Modern art complex or apartment building deny their own materiality and alienate themselves from the working process, seeking to appear instead like the work of alien visitation upon a landscape. Big, public, civic and cultural buildings — which dramatise and emphasise their “bigness” -, do not alienate, but respect and resonate with the viewer as willful presences constructed from human interventions through material. Games which articulate “bigness” and refuse to relegate architecture to a “backdrop” or “period ambience”, but articulate it as a formative, material space of encounter, also respect the player and seek to engage and communicate with them. When conservatives criticise what they call “ugly” (i.e., large, social) developments, they favour the “Tiny”, private and hidden. If Big architecture is a conversation, then their ideal of a small, private architecture is the ideal of rejecting participation in the social conversation. The architectural equivalent of a social impulse toward stasis and denial.In 2012, New York’s Franklin Delano Roosevelt Monument was officially opened to quiet popular applause. The structure was originally designed by Kahn in 1973, but remained uncompleted and unfunded at the time of his death the following year. Despite concerns that you can’t execute a project from a dead designer’s plans, it seems like Gina Pollana and team did a good job. It is obviously ‘a Kahn’, although perhaps infused with a certain gardeny pristineness that his completed works would have been a little shy of. But it’s still his brand of contemplative, classical modernism; it still uses its bigness and monumentality to create an affective, reflective space. What struck me when I saw the monument was its fittingness to the designs of people like Horrorshow or games like Homeland — the parallel avenues of trees, the grand, monumental steps. A place to walk into and feel enervated by, yet aware of its scale, aware of its dominating order. One critic said the Monument left them “elated, not offended”, which is fair enough. Instead, I felt that this is just the kind of space that certain freeware designers are creating: using architectural “bigness” to create emotive resonances with the experiencing player. This is a careful and refined practice that remains, in Tschumi’s sense, one that is continually negotiated within a spatial order. These are spaces we cannot ignore, but instead become repeatedly aware of through our tense imposition into their architectural programs. Awed, mesmerized, afraid. We see this across the spectrum of the walking simulator, in the anxious game poems of Horrorshow, the massive deadlands of Connor Sherlock, the trashy underworlds of Lilith, like quirky cousins to the Roosevelt Monument’s stoic, marble grandeur. It shows that some of the most interesting games designers are working very close to the grain of what artist-architects like Kahn were doing, and understand a lot of their lessons, and have folded it into their design practice. The freeware walking game, the pseudo horror experience, the 8bit game poem, are already anticipating and aware of what “big” and mesmeric architectures can do.These considerations suggest that designers, such as Horrorshow, are already architects — even if they don’t work in brick and mortar, even if they are creating “impossible” programs in unreal landscapes. Level design doesn’t need architects, but it does need designers with architectural sensibilities building concept-driven spaces which build and develop tension between the player and the space of play. The existence of games that have achieved this means that even if Kahn is dead, and our cities are glutted with the shrill inanities of ‘starchitecture’ and the bland repetition of plastic clad apartment complexes, there are still architectural worlds being created that are sustaining that tradition, and are still alive to an architecture as presence. An architecture that won’t let us simply ignore it.