Taoradant UniversityKasbah du ToubkalOf all the countries in the Mahgreb (the Mahgreb is the region in northwestern Africa that also includes Tunisia, Algeria and Libya), Morocco has retained the richest architectural heritage. Over the years its architecture has been heavily influenced by African, Islamic, Portuguese, French and Berber culture. This blend has resulted in traditional buildings that today attract tourists from all over the world and and serve as the inspiration for some of the most remarkable structures in the modern era. For this post we’ll take a look at the Kasbah du Toubkal and Taoradant University.In the southern Moroccan city of Taoradant, nestled by the foot of the Atlas mountains sits Taoradant University, a school that Travel &amp; Leisure Magazine ranked #9 in its 2012 list of the ‘Worlds Most Beautiful Universities.’ With its trademark sandy/earthy exterior finish, the university resembles neatly arranged cardboard boxes separated by an axis that splits the site into two halves. The whole property has a unique ‘3D’ feel that seems to suck you into its world and make any visitor one with the property.Personality is achieved by unique patios and gardens that give each academic building a unique identity. Not to mention the contrast between its earthy exterior and contrasting white interiors, that silence any notion of monotony with its design. Designed as collaborative effort by architects Saad El Kabbaj, Driss Kettani and Mohamed Amine Siana, the university is comprised of eleven “blocks” that house classrooms, lecture halls and laboratories.Nestled in the Imlil valley, next to the village of Imlil and under the watchful ‘eye’ of the Jbel Toubkal, the highest mountain in North Africa (part of the Atlas Mountains), sits the Kasbah du Toubkal: a mountain retreat and comfortable haven for hikers and tourists in the area. A ‘Kasbah’ is a term used for the older, native quarters in most north African cities (some circles refer to it as a citadel). So the literal English translation for the name would be ‘Citadel of Toubkal.’ The Kasbah was originally the summer home for Caid Souktani, a local chief during the time Morocco was a French protectorate. When Morocco gained its independence in 1956, the chief left and the Kasbah fell into ruin. It was purchased by brothers Mike and Chris McHugo in 1995, and over the course of the next few years the building design would be revised under the creative eye of architect John Bothamley.What makes the Kasbah especially unique is that it was built by its community, and almost entirely by hand. This attention to detail is seen in its utilization of traditional Berber architecture.Brick walls and Tadelakt plaster comprise its foundation, which is only accentuated by dim lighting and exotic rugs for ambience.Note: “Tadelakt” is a traditional Moroccan plaster primarily made from lime plaster and treated with olive soap. It is used to coat traditional structures in Morocco (e.g. palaces, mosques).It is fitting to end this post on this mountain retreat, as it is a perfect segue to the role Morocco plays in my upcoming novel. I promise you will love the scenes and interactions I created, so get excited!Morocco is one of many locations featured in my novel, Eteka: Rise of the Imamba. Be sure to follow this publication via the prompt below for more great posts on architecture around the world!NEW YORK CITY. LIBERIA. CONGO. GUINEA-BISSAU. MOROCCO. NIGERIA. LONDON/ENGLAND. SOUTH-AFRICA. GHANA. ALGERIA. INDONESIA. DETROIT/MICHIGAN. TANZANIA. ETHIOPIA