“Smart homes for inquisitive minds”DesignTechnologySoundsSustainabilityA unique Business ModelDemeuria LivingEquestrian EstatesCurrent ProjectsFeel Free to learn moreInvestors &amp; PartnersIt has been the driving idea behind our brand identity and the concept of Demeuria. Bringing together talented individuals to create stunning sustainable homes and architectural projects while incorporating technology in a user friendly way.This is Demeuria.Architects, Engineers, Technology Specialists, Software Developers all working together to design the perfect habitat.There are no set models. No predefined houses to choose from, it would be a violation of our core vision — A home needs to be designed for you. Not for someone else.When we meet, we have a blank sheet of paper, pencils and we listen. We listen to understand who you are, what kind of family you have or dream of having, and what are your various interests.It’s the only way we know, to be able to conceive something that will be the extension of you. Not something you must learn to fit in.Can you just imagine paying a mortgage for the next 2o years for a generic home?We think not.We believe in tech and we understand it. Home automation was a pillar of our initial designs back in 1989. Since then we have perfected our innovative solutions to incorporate the latest mobile apps to control your home from your lounge chair in the garden, or in Rome, while waiting to board your flight.We are artists &amp; musicians too. We have studied physics of music, and we are also classically trained musicians enjoying various music genres, from Adele to Aerosmith up to Diana Krall or Bill Evans.This allows us to create the best multimedia room where you will enjoy listening to every pristine notes in the comfort of your favorite leather sofa.Demeuria creates low carbon footprint homes with a hybrid construction system of concrete &amp; wood structure, incorporating natural insulation like wool, cellulose or wood fiber. From our Legend One Modular concept, the ideal housing solution for Millennials, to our architect design projects, we use innovative technology to deliver sustainable habitat in Europe.Demeuria has a network of franchises in Europe and the number is growing. We are the only ones to centralize design, marketing, innovation and factory assembly in a sustainable way with a turnkey smart homes solution.Talented traditional home builders can now offer Demeuria EcoHybrid Homes to their customers and be assured of flawless quality with the latest technological advances in a low carbon print solution.Introducing Living — our answer to smart sustainable renovation &amp; interior design.Because sometimes, you already have the house of your dreams. It stands at the perfect location, in the ideal setting. But, maybe it could need some refreshing, more open space, a new kitchen, with a granite countertop, or an extension to get more living space to admire nature.Our services include: architect design, the best sustainable insulation available, home audio specialists, sublime kitchens, and multi-generational house add-ons. Get in touch for a free quote and availability in your area.Demeuria, partnering with the luxury haute couture Dardant Equestrian Brand has extensive experience in creating upscale country homes for the equestrian market.Demeuria has launched SmartMinds Ecowork in Luxembourg as well a stunning residential projects in le Grand-Duché and has showcase homes coming out of the ground in the UK in 2016.To inquire about your future Demeuria EcoHybrid Home in Europe, please contact us and discover what everyone is talking about.Demeuria is currently in its Second Private Funding Drive and has room for partners and associates in London, Luxembourg or Vancouver. If you feel that you share our vision and want to change the world one house at a time, we would love to hear from you.[email protected]/*  */Copyright © 2016 Demeuria World | All rights reserved |London, United Kingdom — LuxembourgDEMEURIAwww.demeuria.com