The Modernist movement began in the early twentieth when century architects and designers sought to create a new, better society after the devastation of the 1st world war. The movement was pioneered by European architects such as Walter Gropius and Mies van der Rohe, with the most famous being the Swiss architect Charles-Édouard Jeanneret who would later be known as Le Corbusier.In 1911 Le Corbusier began to travel extensively and in particular travelled through Eastern Europe. Although Le Corbusier never reached Japan on his travels there are many similarities to be drawn between his idea of the house as “a machine for living in” and the design of traditional Japanese homes.The most common style of traditional Japanese house is called “Sukiya-zukuri”. The word “sukiya” refers to the building in which the traditional Japanese tea ceremony would be held and this is where the style comes from. A typical “sukiya-zukuri” style house is a small, modest dwelling which is simple and un-ornamented. The house is arranged around tatami matting which was used as flooring and as beds which could be rolled out for sleeping and then rolled up for storing in the daytime. The construction of a traditional Japanese house is different to that of a Western house. In Western construction the exterior walls are used to support the weight of the house but in a “sukiya-zukuri” style house wooden pillars are used to support the structure. This means that “shoji”, sliding paper screens, can be used for the walls which means that natural light can filter through and the rooms can be opened out to the nature outside.In 1927 the city of Stuttgart commissioned rising modernists architects such as Walter Gropius, Mies van der Rohe and Le Corbusier to design an estate in Weissenhof which would act as an exhibition of their new style. Le Corbusier’s contribution to the project, the double house, imagined a new way of living which is remarkably similar to the way people lived in traditional Japanese houses. In the double house the main room had no fixed purpose, Le Corbusier made use of sliding walls as a way of partitioning the space. During the day the walls would be left open to reveal a large open living area and at night beds would be slid out of the built in cupboards and the walls pushed shut to create private bedrooms. The kitchen and bathroom were left as small rooms which in a sense were tucked away at the end of the house. This is very similar to the layout of a traditional Japanese house where the main room can be adapted to suit many purposes by moving the shoji and tatami mats, whilst the kitchen and bathroom are built as extensions on the side of the house.One of Le Corbusier’s most famous works is the 1928 “Villa Savoye” in Paris, the construction of which also demonstrates the similarities between modernist and traditional Japanese architecture. The Villa Savoye is the definitive example of Le Corbusier’s manifesto “The Five Points Towards a New Architecture” which were his guiding principles for modernist architecture. In the “Five Points” Le Corbusier advocates the use of pillars to support the load of a building, allowing the façade and interior walls to be designed freely. At the Villa Savoye the use of pillars to bear the weight of the house meant that Le Corbusier could make the walls of the ground floor almost completely from glass, allowing the space to be filled with natural light and be opened up to the outside. In the construction of this house and future modernist buildings the pillars are used in the same way as in the Japanese “sukiya-zukuri” style house allowing the interior to become a more flexible, open space.Throughout the 1930’s Japan’s relationship with modernism grew through the work of such Japanese architects as Junzo Sakakura and Kunio Maekawa who both spent time working with Le Corbusier in Paris. Junzo Sakakura joined Le Corbusier’s studio in 1930 and eventually rose to the position of chief of the studio. While Sakakura worked there the studio designed the 1932 Swiss Pavilion, which can only have benefited from his architectural heritage. In 1937 Sakakura was commissioned to design the Japanese pavilion at the Paris International Exhibition. The design made use of the structural pillars and open plan interior and won the “Grand Prix” of the exposition.Upon their returns to Japan, Sakakura and Maekawa fused Western Modernism and Japanese architecture into a successful style. A style which can be seen today in the work of architects like Tadao Ando who’s buildings show the Japanese respect for nature combined with a creative use of natural light.