Unexpected monumental architectureWe all know how much New York offers as an architecture expert under the 38hours cities. But did you know that we have some undiscovered talents under the cities, which show off better in other fields than monumental designs?Wotruba Church — ViennaAt Georgenberg in Vienna stands this confusing and unusual church. Wotruba Church was built by Fritz Wotruba, an Austrian sculptor, whose intention was to set a different order and let people see the variety of possibilities concentrated in one monument. With 152 blocks he constructed an asymmetrical form, which don’t seem to match first. But then again it sets a new rule of aesthetics, due to the new and coherent image the components build.Walden 7 — BarcelonaNot untypical for Barcelona, with its enormous variety of architectural facilities, but untypical for a social-housing experiment Walden 7 presents the new thinking of residential architecture by Ricardo Bofill. To prevent losing yourself in there, apply for a guided tour from a volunteer two weeks in advance. This is how you really get the feeling for this utopian construction, which hosts more than 400 residences and heralds a new era of community living.Isokon Building — LondonBuilt in 1934 the Isokon Building has some interesting stories to tell. Only few of its former inhabitants like Martin Gropius, Agatha Christie or Marcel Breuer must have enjoyed living in this minimal design space. With its 4 floors the building held apartments in the past and is now a gallery, presenting urban plain architecture and modern furniture by Jack Pritchard.Olivetti Towers — FrankfurtEgon Eiermann built the Towers as the headquarter for the Italian typewriter and printer manufacturing company Olivetti. On both opposite corners of the building stand the towers as inverted cantilevers. The construction started 1970 and ended 1972, when Eiermann was already dead. Known as one of the most famous german architects Egon Eiermann left his mark also in Frankfurt, after being already successful with renovating the Karl-Wilhelm Gedächtniskirche in Berlin in the 50's.Curious on more architectural secrets of the 38hours cities?Check out our Guides here:Or download the app: