Learning History by Creating ArchitectureCommentsReading Time: 2 minutesWhen Edwin Lutyens (1869–1944) was assigned to design the buildings of New Delhi in 1920s and 30s, the first thing he did was to understand in depth the features of classical architecture. Lutyens had disrespect for India’s thousands of year’s architectural diversity. However, the authority was in favour of the local architectural features that characterized India’s historical identity. Lutyens was forced to adopt the Indian architectural style. As a result local Indo-Sarsanic motifs and the dome of Sanchi stupa were formed as key elements in the design of Rashtrapati Bhavan.Architecture is part of history and heritage studies in Indian middle schools. Students learn about history of particular eras or dynasties through their architectural connections. For example — the history of Mughal India; students learn about the wonders of architectural creation of Mughals, such as Humayun’s Tomb in Delhi or Taj Mahal in Agra. Learning about these also fall in a major ASSET skill ‘Art and Heritage Appreciation’.But most of these leanings are exam focused. Students don’t get opportunity to experiment or apply their learning in real world situations. So it becomes meaningless.Understanding and appreciating historical architecture is not only about history. It has also connections with maths, science and creativity. The ground plan and the overall shape of a monument forms an interesting idea for conceptual understanding in geometry. Now the question arises — can the students use their creative imagination building hypothetical models or sketches for various proposed buildings?Supposing a xyz city of India wants to build a new town hall and the authority wants to make it as a symbol of city’s architectural diversity. Now what students can do — they can explore the city’s architectural diversity consisting of religious and secular buildings. They can draw the best of all and fuse them into one. By doing this they are exposed to the city’s heritage, architecture, history and culture. They bring in their maths skill and creative imagination. The same can be experimented for hypothetical state level buildings and national level buildings. They can also plan a hypothetical city by creating architectural models.To sum up, this is one of the best methods adopted for experiential learning in history and heritage. In turn, it helps building their appreciation skill for India’s unique architectural diversity. And the best part is they own something.By Jitu Mishra — Educational SpecialistOriginally published at blog.ei-india.com on May 24, 2015.