“Toxic”Architecturea story about architecture of a post-soviet city.When you start to talk about toxicity of a city, you’ve maybe use the definition for high carbon level in the streets (also you think about this: Cd2+, Hg2+, Co2+, Cu2+, etc.), but what I’m going to write is not so far about this.So you’ve maybe think that toxicity is about density, answer is not really about Hong-Kong’s type of density as in photo below:The toxic part of the post-soviet city consist in the process of slow death of the parks, so, such means developers start to rent the park’s area, and after illicit privatization of the area,they begin to build massive residential condominiums.When all this is under construction, I’m asking my self if in urban density exists green space, and if there is a place for the trees. How in urban density can be provided green zones which surrounds the nearest buildings? How in post-soviet city, the growing of density can save the green environment?The answer is to expand the construction zones, in suburbs, and within them to provide a stable infrastructure: shops, schools,medical care hosts, kindergartens, and a small business centers or maybe hubs. To expand a territory means not only to develop a great residential infrastructure but beside of all to offer a great environment for human interaction (from social and economic prospective). In conclusion any former-soviet city must to have urban planners, they will give the solutions not only for capital growth but also will pull together the needs of its inhabitants.The second part of this toxicity consist in aesthetic toxicity.For example we already have a soviet architecture (similar to Le Corbusier architectural spirit, but differing by one crucial thing, the lack of evolutionary vision), which was oriented to social housing development and soviet infrastructure, including cultural palaces, administrative buildings, schools, concert halls, circuses, etc. For nowadays this aesthetic toxicity appears for my own perception as impregnated species of parasitic architecture of post-soviet man.For comparison please check the information about parasitic architecture concept , and here. Please pay attention to the concept of parasitic architecture which totally differ from the parasitic architecture of post-soviet man.We can discover in pictures bellow the renovated city by the soviet union in latest's 60, and when people are looking at those pictures, they feeling nostalgia.But even we, who didn’t had to live in that epoch, only thing that we could say is that, “Oh-that was an awesome city!”. Now what we have is just “included” architecture in places which were prohibited by the rational laws of urban structure. Or we can find toxic architectural buildings on spaces meant to be used as playgrounds for kids or in publicly use.Also another part of carbonized city is considered as toxic the gasoline emission, because the logic of residential builders is just to give to their clients a space for living without thinking a lot about the parking zone. And the city’s mayor doesn’t care if the streets are walkable or not, if there is a good public transport services. In a post-soviet city, the idea of public transport means the utility for losers.Let me explain that our constructions doesn’t have underground parking floors, in same way as in European countries. EU’s condominiums are build with underground parking storeys meanwhile in post-soviet countries is just a deal for luxuries residential mansions. So many developers are concentrated to the centers of post-soviet cities, that’s why we’re living in a growing pollution of the air, cause the cars are overloading the city center.“Toxic architecture” of a post-soviet city makes possible to loose the center’s assignment, its historical roots. How? by excluding the meaning of central historical area, fulfilling it by mansions and commercial centers.Please feel free to comment and to criticize me :)