Architecture Spotlight: New York (Sperone Westwater Art Gallery; Abhay Wadhwa)Sperone Westwater Art GalleryAbhay WadhwaIf New York City is the mainstream, eclectic heartbeat of culture in American society, then downtown New York is its pulse. Western Chelsea is considered by many to be New York’s contemporary art district, and together with SoHo hosts a vast collection of art galleries, artists and buildings that reflect its aesthetic allure. For this post we’ll highlight the captivating Sperone Westwater Art Gallery in SoHo. We’ll also spotlight architectural lighting designer Abhay Wadhwa and his international lighting design firm, AWA Lighting Designers. Let’s get to it.Situated on Bowery Street in SoHo sits an unusual building; its unmistakable sharp black, white and signature red contrasts making it stand out from its neighbors like an oasis in the Sahara Desert. The building at 257 Bowery is home to the Sperone Westwater Gallery, a contemporary artistic hub that has hosted artists like Kim Dingle, Guillermo Kuitca, Malcolm Morley and Julian Schnabel. The art gallery has actually been in existence since 1975, when it was founded by New York arts advocate Angela Westwater, Italian arts dealer Gian Enzo Sperone and German arts dealer Konrad Fischer. The gallery originally lived on 142 Greene Street before relocating to the Meatpacking District in 2002 where it lived at 415 west 13th Street for 8 years. In 2010, the gallery relocated to its current location, adding a new layer to the cultural identity of the Bowery.Designed by the internationally renowned architecture studio, Foster + Partners, the building stands out due to its long, narrow appearance, which measures just 25x100 feet. If you stood across the street, or in another high rise with a view of the building, you would see the gallery’s most striking feature: the red elevator (or based on its size we could say a ‘moving room’) sliding up and down the pencil like structure, which the architects at Foster +Partners accurately describe as a “physical response to the gallery’s dynamic programme and a kinetic addition to the street.”The moving room can be “parked” at any one of the buildings 8 floors, which makes the exhibition space dynamic and flexible. Enjoy the below video that shows this dynamic architectural masterpiece at a glance.Abhay Wadhwa, aka “The Poet of Light” is a very interesting personality in the world of architecture and design. His formative years in the 70s and 80s were spent in India, and if you had told him then that today he would be heading up his own successful architectural lighting firm in New York City, chances are he would not have believed you. But yet here he is, his firm, AWA Lighting Designers firmly established in Brooklyn. And this specialist has certainly made a name for himself: his work has been featured across India, New York City, Dubai, New Jersey, Hong Kong and Saudi Arabia. Check out the below pictures that offer a sample of his achievements to date:Trained as an architect, he discovered his passion for lighting design while working part-time at a theater gig during his sophomore year in architecture school. He founded AWA Lighting Designers in 2002, and since then has transformed his startup into a respected global brand. Abhay likes to focus on projects with high design content, projects that are challenging, projects that can make people happier and use lighting to influence moods. His economic approach to lighting design is to be cost effective and energy efficient. His aesthetic approach is a poetic one, that involves enhancing specific focus points and revealing subtle architectural details and rhythms. And his eclectic nature is evident even in conversation. When I spoke with Abhay for this article, we discussed topics ranging from the intricacies of lighting design (lighting levels, lighting litigation, lighting across different cultures) to history, anthropology and economics across Asia, the Caribbean and Europe. He is quite a unique character, and I appreciated that about him. If I was a contractor/builder evaluating an architectural service provider, besides having a Big Picture, intimate understanding of the project, I would also want someone who took into serious consideration the market, cultural and social forces; past and present, at play, and for that Mr. Abhay Wadhwa has my salute. Talking with him was definitely a treat. Be sure to check out his firm, AWA Lighting Designers for more samples of their work. I’ll leave you with the below video of Abhay speaking at the 2015 Professional Lighting Designers Conference. Enjoy.New York is one of many locations featured in my novel, Eteka: Rise of the Imamba. Be sure to follow this publication via the prompt below for more great posts on architecture around the world!NEW YORK CITY. LIBERIA. CONGO. GUINEA-BISSAU. MOROCCO. NIGERIA. LONDON/ENGLAND. SOUTH-AFRICA. GHANA. ALGERIA. INDONESIA. DETROIT/MICHIGAN. TANZANIA. ETHIOPIA