Architecture Spotlight: London (Evelyn Grace Academy, The Park Tower Knightsbridge, Zaha Hadid)The Park Tower KnightsbridgeEvelyn Grace AcademyZaha HadidHistorically, architecture in London has had strong influences from Roman, Tudor, Victorian and Gothic traditions. The Great Fire of 1666, as well as reconstruction post World War II played significant roles in architectural approaches to residential and industrial design in this region, and would help pave the way for the adoption of foreign architectural expressions/movements (e.g. Brutalism). Today London is a global hub for architectural and engineering design in large part due to its relatively stable economy and diverse influences. These themes are reflected in the subjects for this article: The Evelyn Grace Academy, The Park Tower Knightsbridge and acclaimed architect Zaha Hadid, who sadly passed away in 2016, only a few months after this article was originally published. It’s also worth mentioning that the structures in this article are situated in locations featured in my upcoming novel: Brixton and Knightsbridge respectively. So without further ado, let’s get to it.Designed by the late and legendary Swiss-British architect Richard Seifert and built by contractor Y.J. Lovell &amp; Company, this building has been through various transformations over the years and today is regarded as a premiere luxury destination in an already upscale part of London. Known for its unmistakable cylindrical shape, construction on this property began in 1970 and it opened in 1973 under the name ‘Skyline Park Tower hotel.’ Purchased by Starwood Hotels in 2013, it was renamed as the Park Tower Knightsbridge in line with extensive renovations done that year. Leading the hotels rebirth was celebrated interior designer Anita Rosato, who was charged with redesigning the hotels lobby, lounge and bar. The hotel contains 280 rooms including 22 suites that offer panoramic views of London. Other Amenities include a fitness center and the award winning ‘One-O-One’ Seafood Restaurant.Situated in Brixton lies the Evelyn Grace Academy (2010), a remarkable piece of modern architecture that successfully combines the elements of functionality and visual appeal. Designed by acclaimed architect Zaha Hadid, the structure is actually four schools merged into one (middle and upper grades) and designed to hold 1,200 students. The architectural brilliance brought by Zaha Hadid and her team (honorable salutes to Patrick Schumaker and Matthew Hardcastle for additional contributions to design) allowed for individuality for each school within the connected spaces. For more detailed information on this amazing project that is part of Brixton’s urban renewal/gentrification, be sure to visit the project’s page HERE on archdaily.com.Zaha Hadid was a rockstar in the world of architecture. She was Iraqi-British, and was renowned the world over. She was known for her futuristic, unconventional approach to design that tended to focus on curves and fragmented, bold pieces. She won multiple awards, including the Stirling Prize in both 2010 and 2011 (FYI the Stirling Prize is the most prestigious award for architecture in England).Check out the images below for examples of her work:You might enjoy the below video made by her firm, Zaha Hadid Architects. I especially love their focus on diversity and innovation, a great proven testament to the fact that value driven concepts can come from anyone regardless of race or socioeconomic standing.Ms. Hadid was a rockstar and an inspiration to many, including myself. She not only introduced the world to unconventional structures and pushed the boundaries of design, she also championed women’s rights and diversity. I was saddened by her passing, and I decided to honor her and dedicate this article to her memory. She will be missed.Zaha Hadid1950–2016London is one of many locations featured in my novel, Eteka: Rise of the Imamba. Be sure to follow this publication via the prompt below for more great posts on architecture around the world!NEW YORK CITY. LIBERIA. CONGO. GUINEA-BISSAU. MOROCCO. NIGERIA. LONDON/ENGLAND. SOUTH-AFRICA. GHANA. ALGERIA. INDONESIA. DETROIT/MICHIGAN. TANZANIA. ETHIOPIA