Dear Architecture,It is uncommon for a follower of you to refer to a person of deity, but I do so, because there is verity in the words of one such person when he said, “Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.”It is common for a follower of you to regard meekness as weakness, but I wonder if there is more to that. I, your follower, have taken a route far too travelled — the route of demandingness and over assertiveness — not just toward you, but toward the people that enjoy and experience you. In my forcefulness, I have forgotten what it means to be still: what it means to be childlike and to be led to whatever end that stillness takes me. I am, instead, led by my own childish pride.You may not know, but it was during a project trip to the Himalayas when I realised that I had turned meekness into indolence, passivity and subtle manipulation. In my pride as a creator, I forgot my own origins. When I looked at those vast, dry mountains and the tiny children of those mountains for whom I was designing, I felt human — small and finite in every way, but designed for purpose.I am not sure if I can define this meekness, dear Architecture. I am not sure if I ought to. But the opinion I hold in this fleeting moment, is that the meek architect is the assured architect. This assuredness seems to come from a surrender to entities greater than I. Edison “found out eleven hundred ways how not to do things” while inventing the light bulb. This seems metaphorical of humanity and of you, my friend: we are realising that there are some things that the Universe will not approve and some things that it will. The meek seem to have accepted this reality that they cannot twist the Universe to their own ends or make it approve what cannot be approved. The meek remind me of those little children who lived with the mountains.The assuredness, thus, refers to a sense of security in a person’s surrender and trust to something greater than him or her — the Universe, or God, perhaps. The meek architect is so certain of himself and his finitude that he has no need to demand anything for himself. He does not hold onto his rights as something rigid, but delights to leave everything in the hands of the One that is greater than he — his Master.Architecture, you have seen it all — we propagators of the apparent new, have forgotten that the Unique is created in cooperation with and surrender to the Universe. Would you not agree that the architect who adopts the attitudes of his Master will find the Universe backing him in everything he does? I am certain of one thing we architects are called to be, in this state of meek, secure surrender.Quite simply, dear Architecture, we are called to be servants.This letter will be published in the book titled ‘Dear Architecture’, due in December, 2015:http://blankspaceproject.com/dear-architecture-2015/