When I tell people that I started my career in design with a degree in Interior Architecture, it often follows by, so why Interaction Design now? What made you switch? But when look back at my career it never felt that I had to quit doing one thing to pursue the other. It just seemed natural. Design is what made you feel comfortable, safe and secure in a living space, design is also what made online banking possible. To design is to build experiences for the user.If architecture is the design of the navigation, orientation and way-finding through and within spaces, user experience design also encompasses the design of these aspects; the difference is in in the materials used to embody those designs. UX and architecture both mean designing spaces for human beings to live and play with. To achieve a set goal. The difference is the medium.The work of an architect, well a good architect is not just about designing a space that is beautiful. It’s about balancing aesthetics with usability — which is an essential task of the user experience designer. It’s solving problems, crafting solutions that embody that balance. Architectural facets of usability may include anything from a clearly marked entrance, to an intuitive and logical flow through the hallways/corridors and overall layout of a structure, to signage with appropriate labelling and giving clear directions, among many other things.As an architect you cannot ignore the user, the context and the function. Your creation has to be (ideally!) a response to your client’s need, desire and budget and the aim is to create something that would enhance the surroundings rather than damage it (ideally!)The UX canvas is, of course, the web, which is theoretically limitless, and our sites and applications tend to function as independent worlds that have little or nothing to do with other sites and applications. When we begin a project, we are essentially designing a self-contained community that rarely, if ever, interacts with other sites or apps. But that’s not how the user is seeing it. The user of your application is affected by his surroundings and context. His intuitions and expectations are based on these and as an UX designer just like an architect you should not ignore these. Innovation and out of box design that breaks the rule is great, but there’s a fine line between delighting the user and frustrating him.