GM Renaissance CenterJoe Louis Fist Statue (Fist of a Champion)Rainy Hamilton, Jr.Detroit has played a core role in the United States history, and once upon a time was the most vibrant metropolis in America. It’s the heart and soul of the US automotive industry and its manufacturing prowess played an important role during World War II. Detroit is a city that has always produced builders and hands on entrepreneurs, and over the years impressive structures and architects have left their mark on the city’s horizon. And even though in recent years Detroit has taken a hit on the economic front, it still houses architectural visionaries who see potential in this city that has so much historical relevance. For this post lets highlight the GM (General Motors) Renaissance Center, the Joe Louis Fist Statue and Mr. Rainy Hamilton, Jr.The GM Renaissance Center (or “RenCen” as it is sometimes affectionately called) is major landmark in Detroit. Designed in by JohnPortman and his firm, John Portman &amp; Associates (principal architect), the first iteration of the Center was completed in 1977. The final phase was completed in 1981, and renovations based on a collective effort from multiple architectural firms and financed by General Motors were completed in 2003 (cosmetic additions to the Center are ongoing, the most recent implemented in 2011). The concept for the Center was conceived by Henry Ford II (grandson of the legendary Henry Ford) and when the plans for the first phase were announced in 1971, it was the most costly development project in the world with an estimated price tag of $500 million (1971 value). A core vision behind the project was to help stimulate economic growth in Detroit at the time, especially after the impact of the 1967 Detroit Race Riots on the city. The Ford Motor Company originally occupied much of the office space within the towers up until 1996 when General Motors purchased the Center to make it its corporate headquarters.The Renaissance Center is actually a collection of 7 connected skyscrapers (1 hotel tower and 6 other towers that house office, civic and retail space), each based on cylindrical designs. The tallest tower (central tower) stands at an impressive 727ft and today is occupied by the Marriot Hotel, making it one of the tallest all-hotel skyscrapers in the western hemisphere. The Center also features a 5 story glass atrium (the GM Wintergarden) and really cool LED lighting designed and implemented via a combined effort from Lumenpulse and YESCO.The Joe Louis Fist Statue is one of the most recognizable attractions in Detroit city. Created by Robert Graham, the civic monument is a 24ft long bronze sculpture of a fist and a forearm dedicated to former heavyweight champion Joe Louis. The monument was commissioned by Time Inc/Sports Illustrated and dedicated on October 16, 1986.Mr. Rainy Hamilton, Jr. is the co-founder of the architectural firm Hamilton Anderson (HAA), based in Detroit. A Detroit native, Mr. Hamilton’s firm is well regarded as one of the most progressive architectural firms in the United States, and their prolific body of work can be seen throughout Detroit and beyond. A few accomplishments include: work on the Chrysler House, the MGM Detroit, the Dow Gardens and the Detroit School of Arts:Detroit is one of many locations featured in my novel, Eteka: Rise of the Imamba. Be sure to follow this publication via the prompt below for more great posts on architecture around the world!NEW YORK CITY. LIBERIA. CONGO. GUINEA-BISSAU. MOROCCO. NIGERIA. LONDON/ENGLAND. SOUTH-AFRICA. GHANA. ALGERIA. INDONESIA. DETROIT/MICHIGAN. TANZANIA. ETHIOPIA