The architecture of fascismWhile researching for my recent Project for Public Spaces blog post on the human scale, I pulled much more information on Nazi architecture than I was eventually able to use. It’s an uncomfortable mix of fascinating and frightening, especially considering how similar this architecture is to what democratic governments build, or even to what emerges from the complex processes of capitalism.One of the arguments in my piece is that no matter the ideology behind a building, monumental scale architecture has a distinct effect on the mind. Adolf Hitler took advantage of this from the earliest days of Nazi rule. In the words of author Deyan Sudjic in The Edifice Complex, “Hitler used architecture to define and make possible his idea of what a totalitarian state should be… the individual counted for less than nothing.”Hitler bemoaned the state of public architecture, and believed that too much of the landscape was dominated by individual and corporate construction that did nothing for the glory of the state. Speaking from Paris after its conquest, he said, “Our big cities of today possess no monuments dominating the city picture which might somehow be regarded as the symbols of the whole epoch.” He was imagining the Parthenon, or the Coliseum — ruins that persist in the mind until today. Unlike some of his underlings, he didn’t necessarily picture an endless Nazi state, but one that would eventually fall and be studied by future archeologists. Or, in his own words, “if the Movement should ever fall silent, even after thousands of years this witness here will speak. In the midst of a sacred grove of age-old oaks the people of that time will admire in reverent astonishment this first giant among the buildings of the Third Reich.”The term for this is ruin value (ruinenwert in German). Hitler’s friend and favored architect, Albert Speer, wrote about this in his Inside the Third Reich:More than just building for ruins, they were building for power. Sudjic writes:Or, as Hitler simply put it, “New buildings are put up to strengthen our new authority.”Speer knew this, and designed accordingly. He later wrote: “Of course I was perfectly aware that [Hitler] sought world domination …[A]t that time I asked for nothing better. That was the whole point of my buildings. They would have looked grotesque if Hitler had sat still in Germany. All I wanted was for this great man to dominate the globe.” A 1989 Swedish documentary called his style an “Architecture of Doom.”While this interplay of ruination and power are present in all of Speer’s works, they are particularly clear in his designs for the New Reich Chancellery. Most of the construction on this massive building was finished within a year, for a cost of over 90 Million Reichsmark (over $1 billion in modern currency). The center of the Nazi state, this building contained military offices, Hitler’s personal study, and the Führerbunker, now famous as the site of his final moments.The building was designed to intimidate visitors, forcing them to walk the length of the building before meeting with senior Nazi officials. Speer wrote of Hitler’s reaction in his memoirs, recalling that he observed, “On the long walk from the entrance to the reception hall they’ll get a taste of the power and grandeur of the German Reich!”As for the ruin value of the Chancellery, that didn’t end up as Hitler and Speer had envisioned. It was bombed near the end of the war, and during the occupation ended up on the Soviet side of Berlin. They dismantled the rest of the structure, allegedly contributing stone to the Treptower Soviet War Memorial and a nearby subway station.What’s left of Nazi architecture? Speer’s only remaining building in Berlin is the test structure Schwerbelastungskörper — in English, “heavy load-bearing body.” Hitler wanted to enshrine Nazism in building form, and despite his temporary absolute power he failed. Future historians will read about the atrocities of the Nazi party rather than the architectural glories of the Third Reich, and Hitler will forever be a genocidal despot, never the master builder he longed to become.