Architecture Spotlight: Ghana (Akosombo Dam, Villagio Vista, Kurt Merki Jr.)The Villagio VistaAkosombo DamKurt Merki Jr.Regarded as one of the more “progressive” African nations, Ghana is a country that has successfully managed to maintain a democratic and peaceful state that has been a hotbed for foreign investment over the years, in large part due to its rich mineral deposits and recent discovery of oil. The visual effects of the foreign influence on this nation is almost entirely focused on Accra, the nations capital. In recent years, Accra has undergone a westernized makeover unlike anything ever seen before, as foreign trained architects set up shop to cater to the sophisticated tastes of international settlers, businesses and the nations elite. For this post, we shall highlight an example of the new face of architecture in Accra: The Villagio Vista. Also, between the 1950s and 1970s, many African rivers, once worshiped as gods by some local rural communities were tamed by dams built by engineering powerhouses like Italy’s Salini Impregilo and France’s Coyne et Bellier. We will take a high level look at one such dam, the Akosombo Dam, which over the years has gained status as Ghana’s resident ‘celebrity’ when it comes to energy. We will also give a shout-out to Swiss/Ghanaian architect, Kurt Merki Jr. Let’s get to it.Situated in the capital city of Accra sits the Villagio Vista, a relatively new high rise residential landmark that caters to Accra’s upper and emerging middle class. Developed by Ghana’s very own Trasacco Estates Development Company, the plans for the property were conceived as a partnership between British architectural firm Allford Hall Monaghan Morris (AHMM) for design and British engineering firm AKT (Adams Kara Taylor) for structure.The property scheme consists of four buildings (three are currently standing in Accra) that share the same structural designs but differ by color. The colors in themselves are wrapped in Kente ‘skins’ to add some traditional flavor. To add a sense of individuality, the respective buildings have names: Aqua — a 12 story building; Azure — a 17 story building and Alto — a 27 story tower, reputed to be the tallest residential tower in West Africa.The color schemes are said to represent various local landmarks, such as Lake Volta, the Achimota Forest Reserve and the Gulf of Guinea. The buildings are designed to cater to the heat and humidity common in Ghana’s equatorial region through the use of solar thermal panels that provide internal heating and structural designs that focus on keeping cool air in and heat out. The properties have underground parking, concierge service, a fitness center and rooftop swimming pools + bars.The Akosombo Dam sits on the Volta River and is responsible for the Volta Lake, widely regarded as the largest man made lake in the world when it comes to surface area (critics sensitive to the recent power outages in Accra may dispute me on that point). Many historians actually credit the construction of the Akosombo Dam as the main catalyst that drove Ghana into the 20th Century. On a personal note I actually went to boarding school for part of my younger years in this region, and I have been to the Dam in person on a few occasions over 20 years ago (Lord, how time flies!). It is also worth noting that the Volta region is also home to Mount Afadjato: one of many locations featured in my upcoming novel, Eteka: Rise of the Imamba©.A little history on the Dam: the idea for the Akosombo Dam was first conceived in 1915 by British/Australian Geologist Sir Albert Ernest Kitson. Mr. Kitson was a surveyor, and in those days he did extensive work surveying much of West Africa for mineral deposits to support the British Empire. Kitson came up with the idea to derive energy from the Volta River to serve the power plants needed to process the aluminium and bauxite deposits he discovered. Private investigations by South African engineer Duncan Rose (1939/1945) and a 1951 survey report by the engineering firm Halcrow and Partners confirmed the need for a port and Dam in the Volta basin. So when Ghana attained independence in 1957, its ambitious new Prime Minister, Kwame Nkrumah adopted Kitson’s vision to produce energy from the Volta River based on a reappraisal by the American engineering firm, the Henry J. Kaiser Company. The Volta River Authority would be created during this period to oversee the development of the project, and Nkrumah would acquire huge loans from John F. Kennedy’s USA, the United Kingdom and the World Bank to finance the Dam’s construction. Part of the terms of the deal would be the construction of an aluminium smelter in the city of Tema called Valco, then owned by the Henry J. Kaiser Company, and Valco’s access to 65+% of the energy produced by the Akosombo Dam. Increased public dissatisfaction at the lopsided deal would lead future President Jerry Rawlings’ attempts to renegotiate with Kaiser during his tenure in office. Valco was finally purchased by the Ghanaian government in 2004 under the Kuffuor administration. Building the Dam fell in line with Kwame Nkrumah’s Pan African vision to take Ghana into the industrial age. Construction of the Dam would take place between 1961–1965/1966.The Akosombo Dam is 2,170ft long and and 374ft high. Its creation resulted in the Volta Lake, the largest man made lake in the world. It holds a power plant, two spillsways on each side to discharge water, and 45ft tall floodgates. The Dam’s powerplant contains 6 Francis water turbines that are supplied with water to generate electricity. In my younger years I remember visiting the Dam on a school excursion, and standing next to one of the turbines (inside view) while it was in action. Definitely one of the scariest childhood memories for me! Imagine standing right next to a Boeing 747 jet engine while it is on, and you’ll have an idea of my experience!As always, I like to highlight an architect from each region I cover, and for this post let’s meet Kurt Merki, Jr., a Swiss architect and designer with Ghanaian roots. He is the principal owner of Studio KMJ in Switzerland, and has done alot of good work across Europe, including designing the stores for Laederach, a Swiss chocolate company. He is also the brains behind the “iPro,” an Apple concept computer that incorporates the best designs from the iMac and the MacPro. Sounds like my kind of guy. Check out the below video of Kurt speaking on some of his design work for Duravit, a German company that specializes in bathroom furniture/accessories.Ghana is one of many locations featured in my novel, Eteka: Rise of the Imamba. Be sure to follow this publication via the prompt below for more great posts on architecture around the world!NEW YORK CITY. LIBERIA. CONGO. GUINEA-BISSAU. MOROCCO. NIGERIA. LONDON/ENGLAND. SOUTH-AFRICA. GHANA. ALGERIA. INDONESIA. DETROIT/MICHIGAN. TANZANIA. ETHIOPIA