What’ll be Architecture in 2016?Comments from the Veterans:Coming to the Second Part, my comment or predictions:Taking an inspiration from Archdaily, and data from Archdaily, I decided to put together the best of the comments from architects around the globe which actually says how or what’ll come in 2016 for Architecture. If you would like to read the full article on Archdaily-http://www.archdaily.com/780498/50-architects-tell-us-what-they-are-looking-forward-to-in-2016The first part’ll consist of the shortlisted comments which I think are the most apt for the year, 2016. The second part’ll consist of my perception of what’ll Architecture be, or how will it change in 2016. A perspective of a Student(ever learning), a Freelancing Architect.1.Architecture as a profession is currently divided into several camps: the tired starchitects, the uninspired practitioners, the verbose academics, the vintage postmodernists, and the digital masturbators. But a new group is emerging — the strategic entrepreneurs. This group is starting to address the world’s issues — beyond architecture — in meaningful ways, not the superficial gestures we’ve seen in the past. They find opportunities and are able to initiate projects instead of react to client demands. They don’t feign expertise, but are able to assemble teams that can turn ambitions into concrete. They’re scrappy, intelligent, and determined. And they don’t care about the way things are typically done.Kyle MayPrincipal, Kyle May; Architect &amp; Editor in Chief, CLOG2. Answering such a lofty question seemed daunting upon first consideration. What useful perspective, I thought, do I have on the future of architecture? I’m not nearly as plugged in as others are to the trends, happenings, and events within the profession and the practice. Then I remembered these lyrics from “Fear Not of Man,” Mos Def’s introduction to his breakthrough “Black on Both Sides” album: “… people be askin’ me all the time ‘Yo Mos, what’s gettin’ ready to happen with Hip-Hop?’ ‘Where do you think Hip-Hop is going?’ I tell ’em, ‘You know what’s gonna happen with Hip-Hop? Whatever’s happening with us…’ “… so the next time you ask yourself where Hip-Hop is going, Ask yourself, ‘Where am I going? How am I doing?’” So while I’d like to imagine that we could collectively generate measurable waves to ameliorate gross underrepresentation of Blacks in architecture — all within a single journey around the sun — I’ll settle for a couple new commissions. Each is an opportunity to make ripples within the discipline.Sekou CookeSekou Cooke STUDIO3. Steve Jobs and Apple have made us all appreciate the value and impact of user experience (UX). What was once simply a software term has taken on a much greater place in our consciousness. In 2016 we will continue to see the world’s population grow exponentially and further urbanize. One hope for next year is a new level of interplay between people, technology and space. A question for architects is how does UX-type thinking feed back into architectural design. This in no way suggests that design is being reduced to minimalist lines, but rather the opposite, as we are challenged by greater extremes in density, resource use, safety and flow. We’re facing much taller cities, and should expect a new level of innovation in vertical transportation. One of the fastest cars is now powered by battery; and it’s not hard to imagine buildings and public spaces following suit with new networks of power, higher efficiency and smarter controls. We’ve already seen mobile reduce program for “check-in” and reception. What’s next for our mixed-use buildings, cities and the ways we move through them? In 2016, the built environment should lead these adaptations and architects will have an opportunity to introduce new layers of innovation, intelligence and, hopefully — delight — into our work.Jeff KenoffDirector, KPF4. I hope that this year we finally start to challenge a range of orthodoxies that have crippled architecture by portraying humanity as a harmful rather than a creative force: Resilience Thankfully, the word sustainability is fading but is being replaced by the ‘resilience’. At least sustainability seemed to suggest that there might be the possibility of change in the future whereas resilience is a reprehensibly fatalistic doctrine that says we can do nothing except prepare for the worst. Closed “debate” Whenever you hear the phrase “critical thinking”, you know that it involves no criticism and very little thought. This year, we have to encourage a genuinely open, challenging exchange of ideas. No more so than with within architectural education where students need the freedom to think and say anything. Social-RegulationCan we have an argument — rather than a mandate — about what ethical architecture and socially-responsible design mean, so that we might make up our own minds. Self-obsession Stop portraying everyday acts with radical meaning? Cycling, walking are not profound acts. Gramsci advocated “pessimism of the intellect, optimism of the will”: the difference between what is, and what ought, to happen. The aforementioned problems are deeply entrenched but maybe 2016 is when we start to chip away at them.Austin WilliamsProfessor, China correspondent for the Architectural Review5. A new year’s beginning always brings expectations and hope — 2016 is no exception. Especially the following three subjects are on our list. First, the historic COP21 echo should not fall silent. We hope the result in Paris will influence the architectural field in general, and that developers and decision makers will support the responsibility we share. The architectural profession continuously plays a pivotal role in the development of sustainable solutions to the built environment all over the world. The architect’s multidisciplinary skills and ability to apply a holistic view is vital to tackling the extensive climate change challenges. In 2016 this will be even more evident. Secondly, architects know better that anyone how projects involve a process. Today we experience a rising acknowledgement of the advantages in user involvement. By involving various user groups in the development and design process of for instance new public buildings, the local community and end-users will bring new ideas and insightful knowledge into the project, and innovative solutions come to life. This forms the important basis of the social dimension in architecture, it is our hope that this tendency will increase in the years to come. Thirdly, architects provide excellent and functional solutions every day all over the world. However, we should never neglect the artistic and qualitative virtues of architecture. Think about it, architecture frames the life of man. In 2016 we are looking forward to the birth of new courageous architecture that will capture and reflect the human and social thoughts and values of our age.Bjarne HammerFounding Partner, schmidt hammer lassen architects6. 2016 could be a year without architectural cliché. The year when from an ever-growing social awareness, It becomes again a question of matter, shape, composition, air, beauty… and the iconic-formalists give-up looking at themselves in the mirror to finally understand what’s going on outside, in a world of upheaval that clamours to be perceived. The year when parametricism finds the renewed typological debate, when typo-staticists meet thermo-dynamicists, and so do parametricists. The year when shape and performance, history and technique, stop being separate fields also in academics. It could even be the year for a deep breath, when a friendly agreement, in a snap, voids green colour from every project presentation. Joy! A solo year of no truism, no formula or prescription, a year for a fully experimental practice. Precisely, the year when Dom-Ino House turns 100.Iñaki ÁbalosPrincipal, Ábalos+Sentkiewicz; Chair of the Department of Architecture at Harvard GSD7. I believe architecture’s in a great place at the moment and communication is faster than ever — it’s really creating an awareness and thoughtfulness on the part of architects everywhere. There’s a search for what’s meaningful and appropriate to the place, and for the most straightforward, simplest way to express architectural ideas. There’s an extraordinary amount of innovation and creativity, as well as a return to a search for clarity. We see this not only in America; it’s visible all over the world, and I look forward to completing our first projects in eight new countries, including England, Taiwan, Israel, Mexico, and Brazil. Richard MeierManaging Partner, Richard Meier &amp; PartnersThe time has finally come to talk about responsiveness/dynamism in Architecture. Though not has been seen, or heard of yet it truelly has a promising future. Only few architect’s project shows what responsive architecture is, example by David Fisher, Dynamic Tower/ Da Vinci Tower. Why is it so less in numbers is not hard to answer. But, with growing technologies and evolving sense of usage this year seems promising in this regards, atleast in terms of Proposals.2. Experimental ArchitectureThe way AI(Artificial Intelligence) has influenced the field of Architecture in the year of 2015, it is to the no surprise it’ll surely be a major game changer this year. AI along with recent advances in Technology (of lifts, skins, magnetic levitation et al) and Materials (light weight, recyclable et al) and BIM(Building Information Modelling) will be the sole reason of Architecture to enter into a state of Experimentation like never before. We’ve more Data, Information and Tools to make it happen. We’ve more number of Daredevils &amp; Artists than before, and the fact that Parametricism is THE solution to the problems we face in today’s world. As Iñaki Ábalos(Principal, Ábalos+Sentkiewicz; Chair of the Department of Architecture at Harvard GSD) said, “ 2016 could be a year without architectural cliché”.3. Feedback/Datum based Architecture- Democratic ArchitectureThe most crucial part, where People in it’s true form will be able to Participate in the Design Process at a very early stage will make happen what Architecture has never seen before. The designs, getting discussed directly to not just the Local People, but from around the Globe through Instagram, Facebook, Linkedin, Twitter to name the few, will change the way the Design juries used to happen. And the main thing will be, it’ll be a Live Feedback and Pure Feedback without any Interference from any type of Bodies. It can already be seen in many recent projects, like BIG architect’s The Dryline, Janet Echelman’s Suspended Net Sculpture et al. So, Social Websites, Apps and Meetings will be a Default Step in the Design Process.4. Neo-Futurism to Futuristic ArchitectureWell, looking at all the aspects of the changes be it my prediction or of the veterans, one thing is for sure- This year will act as a BRIDGE between Era shift from Neo-Futurism to Futuristic Architecture. The time taken to shift from Neo-Futurism to Futuristic Architecture will totally be dependent on how the year 2016 plays off. It’ll act as an Enzyme/Catalyst, a Deciding factor as to when and how will the Shift take place. If the year 2016 be a positive one for Architecture, i.e. if the Above mentioned changes will start to happen we can consider the New Era/Movement for Architecture will be coming as soon as in the next 5 years, but if it won’t be positive enough we can consider it to be not less than 10 years.