Theory of common architectureI have been operating my architectural firm for 10 years and in that time I have been fascinated with the common factors found in the work I complete. Now this might sound like an insult to my design skills but I am not referring to the common factors of the aesthetic design but instead the architectural graphics/drafting and for the most part structural requirements. Within the architectural drafting process, from initial design to permit application, a draftsperson can observe many common actions, steps or details, independent of the project. Some projects have so many common attributes that I began thinking of them as common architecture.Now common architecture has been around, and utilized, since the beginning of buildings, in fact it is one the biggest reasons architecture is able to change over time, or share characteristics. New ideas can easily be attempted, large complex building can be constructed, or a structure can be styled. This is because common architecture allows you to solve a problem, or invent an idea, the first time and use it over and over again on future project. Now you can move on to solve a new problem, or come up with a new idea.This act of re-using our solutions and ideas is what gives us our standards and building codes. Things become so common in construction that we simply have to refer to a table or a reference to know what should be done, at least for a minimum or maximum.I want to do a quick visualization exercise with you to finish off my explanation of what common architecture is. Let’s design a simple building, a detached garage. It is a square or rectangle plan with an overhead garage door on one side. It has a concrete slab floor and a sloped truss roof. Imagine this garage and possibly how it could be built. How much time did it take you to visualize this garage? Your answer is probably not very long. Does that mean your an architectural or engineering prodigy? Most likely your are not. You can do this simple task because a detached garage is simple in its structure, as the structure does not change too much between projects. The garage may have trusses to form the roof, wood stud walls to hold up that roof, and a foundation to support all of that. Those structural components are easy to imagine and are found in almost all detached garages. This is common. We can change the shape of the building or the amount of windows but If we account for those possible changes, we can define a structure for that garage very early on. That same example is not just for garages but also houses, sheds, warehouses and many others types of buildings which have been standardized, structurally, over the many years. This is common architecture.One important note before we move on. I am not referring to the aesthetic design of the buildings at all. The design can be very unique as long as it conforms to the structural standards of the building type. This is a great thing, as we can be architecturally creative while drastically simplifying the process of creating construction drawings. This is what my theory of common architecture is based on.Now that we understand a little about what common architecture is, I can spend time explaining my theory of common architecture. I spent time developing this theory after watching the technology industry’s impact on so many other industries, succeeding in most industries very well and in my opinion failing in the architectural industry.A big part of this new technology period we live in, is the shift of industries from offline to the online space. This move is done to enable those industries to take advantage of the servers computing power and data warehousing to improve the industry. This shift also brings powerful solutions to end users, you and me, in a ubiquitous way. Knowing modern technology can achieve this, I believe common architecture should be made entirely automated. The end-users, a homeowner or builder let’s say, can simply decide on some project characteristics and the technology will both design and draft the required construction drawings in seconds to meet those characteristic requirements. This automated process for obtaining construction drawings should be the future of common architecture.The automated process for common architecture will utilize a set of standards for determining causality. In other words, determine a standard for each relation between a design decision and how that effects structural requirements or the items needed for a construction set. If a complete set of standards is developed for all allowable design decisions then we can, with certainty, automatically generate construction drawings that meet building code requirements based on any design configuration. This set of standards for determining causality, has a maximum set size, which we can calculate using the equation:Ss = Standards set sizeOt = Design Option Type (contains all possible design options)The standards can be developed in subsets specialized to a particular building type or a more general set for all types of common architecture. This allows the standards to be, tested, evaluated and revised as they grow over time.Once a subset of standards has been established one can simply select characteristics their building should have and the technology will generate the appropriate drawing set. This process will need to evaluate each requested characteristic, validating it’s requirements based on building type as well as validate it’s relationship to all other selected characteristics. To determine all validated characteristics we can utilize the following equation:Csv = Characteristic set validatedCs = Characteristic set (entire, non-validated)Cr = Characteristic requirements setC = Characteristic (individual)With valid building characteristics selected the developed standards can be utilized to generate the required construction drawings. Using modern computer technologies this process can take as little as seconds to complete rather then the typical days required today.Jason A. [email protected]/*  */I founded a company, PlanCache Inc., to work on the theory of common architecture and research or develop technologies in this field. The first of these products Doccet.com will test and evaluate the theory during the upcoming years.