A Meme is Born: The Rise and Fall of the Architecture LOLCatby Jon Kershner, WRNS Studio, Designer and expert of all things LOLCatIt’s National Cat Day, and at WRNS there is a small but zealous group of cat enthusiasts. Some of this group knows about my past as a famous architectural cat blogger. Some don’t. Now, on this hallowed day, I am coming clean about my past as a cat meme celebrity and sharing the story of the Rise and Fall of the Architecture LOLCat.It all starts with an Architecture thesis. Generations of young architecture students have stumbled and fumbled through this time like a teenager succumbing to puberty. After a long Autumn night of staring at my computer, scrolling in and out of my model as if by some chance the lightbulb would turn on and I would be on my way to architecture fame, I grew tired. I sought shelter in the abundance of LOLCat blogs to bring me comfort. Suddenly, the lightbulb flashed on, but not in the way I was expecting.THIS was the therapy I needed. The world needed a new kind of LOLCat meme — one grounded in the art of placemaking, cat humor, and architectural puns. It was so obvious. How did I not see it before? I remembered a building so awful that it was begging for Photoshop improvement: the Longaberger headquarters, a literal take on the company’s product line. I could think of no other building better suited for LOLCat glory. It took only a few minutes to slap a couple cats on the building and call it a day…little did I know that it would start a movement.I emailed it to a couple of friends, and they lost it. It was like a ray of light in the middle of a dark abyss. As I moved back to working on my thesis, I received some reply e-mails from my friends with Architecture LOLCats of their own. All of them equally as inspired by exhaustion and undirected creativity. These early Architecture LOLCats had a critical edge, a subtle context that only the most well versed in both internet cat memes and architecture history could comprehend, yet, as LOLCat memes go, nobody can resist them.The first few images quickly spread through the studios of Wurster Hall… getting forwarded and forwarded again. Soon, people I had never met began e-mailing me their own memes and anecdotes of the laughter that had erupted in their studios. The quality of what people were sending us was astounding and we were all surprised at how much time and thought people had put in to these seemingly thoughtless follies. Who knew that LOL Cats and Architecture history could meld so well? Chance brought them together, but this was a marriage that would last.We started a Tumblr, hastily naming it “Furrocious Forms,” a name recalling both the cute furriness of cats and the seriousness of conversations about built form that we were used to. We set up the blog and my friend Michael Bergin, now an Autodesk researcher, posted a link to the blog on his Archinect page.Soon my inbox was filled with people submitting images. I informed my friends so we could decide how we wanted to curate the site. We decided to allow any and all posts that were submitted to be posted to the blog…a decision we would come to regret.News spread. My dream of architectural fame was being realized…albeit not in the way I anticipated. Michael’s Archinect blog post had been featured on their home page. Someone at Archinect took notice and thought it made for good headlines. Soon after, ArchDaily picked it up and posted a link to our blog. Then it started to make the internet rounds. FastCo featured one of our images as their cover image for their .CoDesign page and covered the story in an articleSubmissions were streaming in from some of unlikely sources. SFMoma sent a couple of images and featured us on their home page. StudioGang took time out of their day to have an Architecture LOLCat competition and sent us all the results. By that winter, we had quickly grown to be the #1 most visited blog post on Archinect of 2012, one of the most visited posts by ArchDaily and we had received dozens of submissions. We were Internet stars.Soon, weeks turned in to months, months into years. Our internet fame faded, and we moved on to various careers in architecture. But the posts never stopped. I still receive posts on a regular basis. But the content of the submissions has gone to the litter box. What were once hilarious, witty and critical posts, have become mindless internet dribble; an unknown cat pasted onto an unknown building with no punch line.Fast forward to today, National Cat day. I am reminded of how quickly Internet content can rise and fall from great heights to desperate lows. It happens every day. From Sad Kanye to Grumpycat…all memes have a lifespan. So today, I’d like to change that; I urge you to help resurrect the golden days of the Architecture LOL Cat. What about Zaha’s stadium? What about the Google headquarters? What about the Vinoly Death Ray? All provide fodder but remain missing in the catalogue of brilliant feline memes. Don’t leave us like this….Please submit your friendly Architecture LOL Cats to http://furrrocious-forms.tumblr.com/ and have a furry, architecture filled National Cat day.