ALÁRA concept storeKunle AdeyemiTokunbo OmisoreNigeria is a country that has been through quite a bit of drama. Colonization and segregation, followed by civil war and many years of corruption, crime, ethnic and religious dysfunction have challenged the stability of this nation. But Nigeria is also filled with brilliant, progressive minds and has housed some very innovative buildings designed by both local and foreign contractors. So for this post let’s keep it positive and highlight three architectural gems from this nation: The ALÁRA concept store, Kunle Adeyemi and Tokunbo Omisore).The ALÁRA concept store is the brainchild of businesswoman Reni Folawiyo, and was constructed under David Adjaye’s architectural vision (if you wish to learn more about David Adjaye you can read about him on my Tanzania architecture spotlight post). In true David Adjaye fashion, the building definitely makes a statement with its subtle yet bold contrasting color schemes, and the square and triangle shapes throughout that give it a classy African feel (prints on traditional tye and dye fabric come to mind). A very recent addition to the Victoria Island real estate scene in Lagos, it caters to couture brands, luxury retail and African culture. Besides the exhibition floors, the building also features a gallery and a restaurant. Check out the below video for a quick overview of the structure:Kunle Adeyemi is a Nigerian architect with an impressive track record to date. An active professor, critic and founder of the NLÉ practice with offices in Nigeria and the Netherlands, he is perhaps best known as the chief architect behind the Makoko Floating School, located on a lagoon in the heart of Lagos city, Nigeria. Other accomplishments include the Leeum Samsung Museum of Art (South Korea) and being part of the team that designed the Prada Transformer (South Korea). He was also involved with the designs for the NM Rothschild Bank (England) and the Seoul National Museum of Art (South Korea). See below for a few samples of project’s he’s been involved in:Mr. Tokunbo Omisore is what in American slang/urban talk is referred to as a “Boss” or a “Top Dog” in the Nigerian architecture game. I agree with a lot of the stances he takes on some of his interviews and talks regarding innovation, continuity and ‘introspective investment.’ Those are Big Picture views that I personally share, so I felt it fitting to give him an honorary salute in this post. His Nigerian based practice, Top Services Ltd has built numerous gas stations and shopping malls across Nigeria.Nigeria is one of many locations featured in my novel, Eteka: Rise of the Imamba. Be sure to follow this publication via the prompt below for more great posts on architecture around the world!NEW YORK CITY. LIBERIA. CONGO. GUINEA-BISSAU. MOROCCO. NIGERIA. LONDON/ENGLAND. SOUTH-AFRICA. GHANA. ALGERIA. INDONESIA. DETROIT/MICHIGAN. TANZANIA. ETHIOPIA