The Emotion in ArchitectureIt can be the most amazing thing, learning about something so out of your realm of knowledge that it excites you inside and out. That’s how I felt after watching this captivating, thought-provoking, and humorous TED Talk given by Marc Kushner, AIA.Opening up with a relatable anecdote about his childhood home, Kushner shared how architecture can evoke emotions within us. For Kushner, the walk from his bathroom to his bedroom had him walk on a balcony that overlooked his family room. This meant if he was walking to his room after having had a shower, anyone in the family room would see him wrapped in a towel. And because of that, he hated that hallway, that bathroom, that bedroom, that house.And so, as a sort-of-absolute solution, he became an architect.He thoughtfully shares a statistic from the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) early in his presentation: American’s will spend 90% of their life indoors. This means that we’re consuming architecture even more than that: the entire time we’re inside, we’re surrounded by it, and often times while outside, we are also surrounded by it.I never realized how much influence architecture had on me, how certain shapes and forms symbolize certain qualities. How the Lincoln Memorial is modeled after the Pantheon, and that both buildings symbolize power and stability to the consumer. How that form has been taken and repurposed into schools, federal buildings, and even residential homes.Kushner discusses the theory of how architecture operates on the principal of a pendulum: on one side is innovation, the other is symbolism. He shares how architects are always moving towards “new technologies, typologies, and solutions for the way we live today” but once they go to far, must swing back to the other side, and re-engage the symbols that consumers are known to respond positively to.This pendulum has been swinging for the last 300 years, until something happened. In 1997 the Guggenheim Museum Bilbao in Spain, designed by Canadian-American architect Frank Gehry, opened. Fashioned in the deconstructivism style, the building, regarded as a “miracle” by the New York Times, changed the way the world looked at architecture.And it happened because the media successfully galvanized around the architecture, and gave these new forms a meaning, thus creating an emotional reaction to these forms. Digital media has now increased the speed in which we consume architecture, and when applied to the pendulum, actually blurs the difference between innovation and symbol.It blurs the difference between architect and consumer. It creates emotionally-charged symbols that we haven’t encountered before. It has the ability to have an artists rendering of a building become a part of the community before it’s ever been built.Marc Kushner believes that it doesn’t matter how we build, by hand or cow or robot, but that it does matter what we build, and the stakes are higher than ever before.