1. Evolve Channels2. Amplify Experience3. Multiply PossibilitiesWith the array of the possibilities that the ever-evolving technology is bringing, the media landscape is changing fast. However, as easy as it is to get overwhelmed by this, the fast pace of innovation is not a bad thing — it offers huge opportunities for brands to reach and captivate the audience in new and exciting ways. Partnerships are being formed in order to keep up with the audience and the familiar ones are being invigorated with new means of storytelling or delivering the content.Technology is allowing for more immersive experiences and changes the way the audience is experiencing the content — being transported from being only a receiver and a spectator towards a more active, co-creating and sense-lightening participation.How can content providers take advantage of the emerging technologies to meet the demands of the modern audience?With every social media channel becoming a publishing platform in itself, it is important to be aware of the different opportunities each of them provides. The variety of channels multiplies the content possibilities and ways to deliver different forms of it. And, with consumers exposed to more than 5000 brand messages a day, it is becoming impossible for brands to simply persuade consumers to buy their products by pushing the message out.How can brands respond to this challenge? It is important to continuously rethink the existing channels — from redefining their purpose to coming up with creative ways of expanding that digital playground. The emphasis on evolving the delivery solutions is what will keep the audience interested.One of the examples comes from a sports channel that offered big games broadcasting through Snapchat. This approach is an efficient way for brands to deliver live events footage for a mobile-first consumer and reach wider audiences. Fashion shows, previously very exclusive and with strict invitations, are increasingly being broadcasted live through Periscope to immediately reach their audience. Brands can also redefine the delivery through existing channels — a cosmetic brand NARS is inviting its fans to help shape the story. The interactive experience is powered by consumer Tweets and broadcasted live on YouTube.Ever-evolving technology is giving brands an increasing amount of possibilities when it comes to playing with experiences and amplifying the effect of what people see and what they feel. One of the possible ways to increase brand awareness is to put emphasis on storytelling that creates multi-sensory experiences, with the support of innovative technologies.The audience attention is short, oversaturated and it is difficult to satisfy them with mere spectatorship — instead the allure lays in switching it towards physical and emotional participation.The answer lays in technology that is bringing us much closer to “real-life” experiences, thanks to VR devices and high definition cameras. By 2018, the VR kits are set to generate a staggering $1.06 billion in global revenue — for brands that means a myriad of new ways to engage the audience in a more immersive way.But what exactly it means for brands? The best experiences are created at the convergence of content and consumer technology and they expands beyond traditional means — a casual sport game enriched with an extra layer of engagement like 3D projections, using wearable technology to collect data and translate it into digital currencies or applying VR kits or videos in content and storytelling.However, as much as using visual cues to satisfy the audience curiosity is powerful enough, it is often other senses, like sounds, that can trigger a range of powerful emotions. A great example comes from a campaign by a train company Thalys, that immerses audience in sounds from a particular city — church bells, accordions and pigeons of Paris contribute to the feeling of the city as much as the famous sights — and lets the passersby experience the city in a more immersive way.The way is also pioneered by brands like Patrón tequila that uses VR Oculus kit to give an unconventional and engaging spin to a conventional Hacienda headquarter tour.Emphasis on the partnerships between media and brands offers a possibility not only for creating new types of content, but also reaching a wider audience. Some companies are already opening up their data pools to other media partners — which helps to create new stories with the additional expertise of their partners. Whether it is journalism, multimedia or distribution, these partnerships with what seems like direct or indirect competition, can be immensely beneficial to both of the sides and result in great outcomes.The example can be the partnership between Pinterest, Vice and Bank of America that collaborated in the marketing effort used to promote the “Business of Life” project. Through its Pinsight Labs, Pinterest provided insights on the financial topics that could be interesting to the millennial audience. Based on this information, Vice has produced a digital video series on financial management that was sponsored by the Bank of America.Another example is the co-operation between Wired and Netflix. Wired is providing the expertise and insights on the digital culture and Netflix has backed it up with its data, resulting in an interactive feature/documentary detailing how TV has changed throughout history.Backed up with diverse data, insights and expertise, these partnerships can enable the brands to be a better storyteller that provides content that is more relevant, useful and interesting to its consumers. With over 70% of consumers reporting that they prefer to learn about products through content rather than traditional advertising, it is crucial for the brands to recognize the need for better stories and amp up their efforts. And it is not just “a story” — the expectations of consumers towards the content that brands are producing are constantly evolving and shifting towards higher-quality, more interactive and engaging content.This article was written based on the research that we featured in the “Near Future of Media” — a report that was made possible together with my colleague Fabiola Lewandowska, a consultant at LHBS.