Social media silence doesn’t equal apathy.In light of the tragedy in Paris, as I stared wide-eyed at the news trickling in, I wrote this on my Facebook and Twitter pages:Adding to the worldwide conversation felt trivial, needless. Writing the standard “My thoughts are with Paris” or “ Hold your loved ones closer tonight” felt like understatements. Changing my photo to the French flag felt meaningless. There is nothing I can offer to my social media community at this time, nor do they need to confirm how sad and frustrated I am. They feel the same way.(I am not judging those who choose to express their grief this way; for me, it just doesn’t feel right.)However, a concern that pops up- a concern that one shouldn’t be entertaining when such atrocities happen- is that by not writing your thoughts, feelings or opinions on social media about such awful occurrences, you may be perceived as not caring or not paying attention. When you watch your entire feed fill up with well wishes and commentaries from others, you may feel that by not joining in, you are insensitive or apathetic.But it’s ok if you don’t want to comment; we all express our grief differently. For many of us, our first thought is not to run to Facebook or Twitter and add to the conversation. To reflect as you go about your day, or to mourn in a private group of friends or family, is not wrong. And for the individuals who do deal with their emotions by articulating them on the web, know that your peers who do not express their emotions in such a manner are still mourning too.With that being said, in lieu of discussing such events online, I would recommend not posting anything at all immediately after the news is released. Sharing unrelated content, particularly content that features frivolous matter, could be perceived as indifference. Upon hearing the news of the needless and brutal deaths of innocent people, one doesn’t need to see an article featuring a cat who learned to flush the toilet seeded in their feed, unless it is prefaced by an acknowledgement of the tragedy. If you choose to not grieve publicly, consider your friends who do.There is no social media handbook that tells us how to deal with such events, but during aforesaid times it’s important to let judgement slip away.We are all thinking of Paris, whether we say it out loud or not.