5 things the media does to manufacture outrage.1. There is what will be known moving forward as a “Thing that Happened.”2. The media mines Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, Tumblr, and whatnot for story ideas, eventually find “Thing that Happened.”3. The narrative told by the media in step 2 is considered reality.4. Coverage of Thing that Happened causes it to trend on social media, inviting response pieces and additional coverage.5. The same media that creates the controversy criticizes people for being so perpetually “outraged.”Next time you get ready to rant about how P.C. culture is ruining the world, about how college students are coddled, or whatever the controversy of the week happens to be…So is the world any more “outraged” than it’s always been? Nah. We’re just getting toyed with.People are so sensitive these days! People are just offended by every little thing! Millennials, amirite?!Is the world more easily “outraged” than it used to be? I don’t think so, but then again, there’s no real way to tell.I think maybe the media is just getting better at making us all feel like the world is little more than a collection of 7 billion whining people-organism-things.The media’s always manipulated the public, and while sometimes that’s used for large things (see: presidential campaigns), more often manipulation is just a way to find content from one day to the next (between the large things).Here’s a story about something that happened to me, and the 5 steps involved in going from innocuous comment to an “outrage narrative” providing us all with content for days to come.And oh man, it’s usually something extraordinarily stupid.Earlier this year, Kayla and I were hanging out at the Sephora near the North &amp; Clyborn red line station. As we were looking around, I was skimming through nail polish, lipstick, and eyeliner, checking out the names (Don’t make fun of me! This stuff actually really interests me! I mean, how many ways can you say “This is red” or “That’s purple?” Right?). Anyway…I took a few pictures of names I thought were funny, weird, or just, well… notable. My phone has somewhere around 2,000 pictures on it at this very moment, and most of them are just stupid things I’ve seen around town.So anyway, I decided to tweet one of those pictures along with the caption: “Went shopping for some makeup. How on earth is this a lipstick color?” about Kat Von D’s “Underage Red.”There were no exclamation marks, no angry emojis, no Change.org petition to boycott the store until they removed it from shelves. Nothing. My reaction and sentiment was pretty much this:As of this writing, the tweet was only retweeted 88 times, and seen by just over 25,000 people. In the grand scheme of things, this is tiiiiiiny.Here, I mean, check that out compared to one of my more popular tweets (which was just a joke about an ad campaign).Responses were few and mostly just kind of poking fun at the absurdity of that name and the connotations it can have. Nothing big.So, what can we conclude? That no one really cared all that much about the lipstick tweet — certainly not me.Here’s where it gets fun, especially when you consider that this just started with a few people I know on Twitter who honestly don’t care what someone names their lipstick.One outlet picks it up (in this case, it was Business Insider)By the time it’s picked up by another outlet (in this case, Fortune), the classification has been upped from “disgusted” to “outraged.”By the time it made it to the next outlet (TIME), it had taken listicle form.(And you get the idea, right? It just kept spreading from one site to the next… I’ll spare you links to all of them, but believe me, there’s a bunch.)With each of these new articles, a new stream of people came flying into my mentions to tell me how I was overreacting. They were so outraged about my (nonexistent) outrage. They were angry.Emails, tweets, Facebook messages, blog posts about “outrage culture,” etc. were thrown my way. These people were very angry about how supposedly angry I was (which I wasn’t).In this case, Kat Von D responded to the “controversy” on her Facebook page, vowing not to apologize (for something no one actually wanted an apology for).And, then, of course, media outlets covered her response because now it was actual (sort of) news.And once again, my feelings were just…OMG people are always so angry!It’s all kind of like this.For instance:Are there people upset about stupid nonsense? Absolutely. If it becomes “a thing,” however, it’s because the media made it “a thing.”For example, the entire “War on Christmas” meme, which exists almost exclusively because Fox News keeps telling us it exists.Pretty outrageous, right?