I feel sad.I can’t sleep.I’m not myself.It’s funny, because I have no reason by any means to feel this way.I have a loving supportive family, a roof over my head, and food in my kitchen. I love my job. I’m one of the few lucky people in this world who can say that. My business is doing fantastic on all levels: we just hired our President of Mobile, raised some capital, have a great partnership in the works, and are about to launch our second software product into private beta testing. My health is fantastic and I’m in the best shape of my life. The list goes on.And yet, I feel sad.I enumerated all of these things for two specific reasons. First, if you took five minutes to scan through my social media content you’d already know all of this information about me. Second, to remind myself just how incredibly blessed I am to have all of these great things happening in my life. In our culture it’s socially acceptable for people to broadcast about how “amazing” their life is, but not how hurt, afraid, anxious, or sad they feel on the inside. What you wouldn’t know from my social media activity is that I suffer from SAD, or Seasonal Affective Disorder.Many people believe that this disorder is caused by a lack of exposure to sunlight, which would make sense considering the sun set at 4:34pm today in Northeastern Pennsylvania. It was 28 degrees outside so you wouldn’t find me soaking up the early afternoon sun.One of the most magical things about living in Pennsylvania is the experience of the four seasons. The cyclical modality of life repeating itself over and over again. Life, death, rebirth. The sweet summer sun, the magnificent beauty of fall, the serenity of the first snow, and the sign of life as the butterfly emerges from a cocoon in the spring. Unfortunately for me, it also means winter depression.It’s not only frowned upon to share depressing content on social media, the technology’s structure makes it nearly impossible to engage with “sad” content. “I feel sad today.” How do you respond to that as a user? Do you retweet it? What statement are you making by retweeting that? If it’s on Facebook do you like it? Isn’t that kind of mean? You “like” that I’m sad?Not only do we not have the proper tools or technical lexicon to engage with this type of content on social media, but we also have the social stigma of “people just looking for attention.” This stigma needs to be broken. Maybe the person just needs someone to talk to, even for five minutes. Or perhaps they have SAD or some other mental health issue. Regardless, we are human beings. Sadness, depression, anxiety, fear, and loneliness are essential to our existential identities as thinking creatures.I asked my Twitter followers a question: Someone tweets “I am sad.” how do you react? I’ve never met either of these followers in real life, but thankfully my faith in humanity was restored after seeing these responses.Speaking of Twitter, in Nick Bilton’s new book, Hatching Twitter, there was one specific quote that really caught my eye.And yet, I feel SAD.It’s not the type of sad you experience when you are mourning or the kind you have following a breakup. Rather it’s a feeling of cold loneliness, regardless of who you are with, where you are, or how amazing your life is going from an outside perspective. SAD is the stubborn gadfly, gnawing at both the mind and the body. It’s not everyday I feel this way, but on short bitter cold days like today this feeling was in full force. You won’t find me sitting in a corner crying about it though. I use my writing, work, yoga, meditation, prayer, and weight lifting to swat the gadfly feelings out of my mind.I don’t have all of the symptoms, the three big ones for me are insomnia, anxiety, and ironically social withdrawal. You would know that already if you stumbled on my posts about sleep cycles, or on anxiety, or on what it’s like being an introverted entrepreneur.I publish it to the world. If SAD is going to be the gadfly of my mind and body, then I’ll be the social gadfly of the world with my writing. I’m not afraid to expose my feelings on the Internet. Part of it is healing for me. Part of it is getting it out there, telling someone. I write in hopes of helping and inspiring others to not be afraid of talking about mental health, human emotion, or their feelings.I know one thing: I’m not alone. My inbox and mentions feed on Twitter are both filled with hundreds of people communicating that they feel the same way. Some have gone out of their way to tell me that my content has inspired them, helped them, or even changed their lives in some small way. My own way of making the world a better place.As a writer it’s humbling to share these ubiquitous connections with people I’ve never met before and probably never will. Feeling the same emotions. Thinking the same things. Becoming inspired myself. Feeling, a little less alone.Perhaps this status thing has a chance after all.