The New Media is Made of MemesA year ago, Snapchat, the world’s fastest growing social network, told advertisers, media companies, and writers like me everything we wanted to hear. With the debut of its new media hub Discover, it promised access to its app’s mostly young 100 million daily users. Then, in an official announcement, Snapchat doubled-down by emphasizing that Discover wouldn’t just be some click-bait cash grab but “a storytelling format that puts the narrative first” from “world-class leaders in media:”Snapchat — better known for its disappearing messages exchanged between friends and life-casting celebrities — was anointing 15 media companies (now 20) as the content kings of the app, who would produce daily editions. More skeptical observers wondered how traditional news outlets such as CNN or the Wall Street Journal might coexist with teenagers’ selfies and videos of EDM DJs rushing through airports.These media partners have now had months to hit their stride. So a year after its launch, I clicked on the day’s first Discover story from the world-class photojournalists at National Geographic: A grainy pixelated short video of two owls, doing nothing, awkwardly cropped to fit my iPhone’s vertical screen.A thought bubble appeared above one owl: “You’re a hoot!”The other owl agreed, “I’m owl-fully glad you’re my friend.”I enjoy a good owl joke as much as the next person, but world-world class storytelling this was not. Snapchat insists “this is not social media.” Then what the hell is it?In the past few months of exploring Snapchat Discover I’ve discovered innovative MTV short-form series, tabloid Daily Mail trash, hilarious original Comedy Central shorts, terrific Vox explainers, savvy adaptations of Buzzfeed content, a great goddamn many kitten videos, quite a few Where-is-Waldo-style collages that encouraged me to circle the correct Kardashian, and a whole lot of major media brands muttering “Tay,” “Bey,” “slay,” and “bae” like they’ve contracted some sort of millennial Tourette’s.It’s easy to mock the off-key work of media companies now woefully out of their depth. But forget the awkwardness of media stalwarts pandering to the #squadgoals of teenagers, and the much-hyped narrative storytelling, and the celebrity lifecasting — all of which you can find on other platforms. What’s struck me about Snapchat is the aggressive way media brands are insinuating themselves into the app’s core purpose: messaging.Despite Snapchat’s dismissal of “clicks and shares,” the app is successful precisely because it’s built on sharing. So is Discover. On other platforms, media companies expect passive consumption — with active engagement in the form of a one-to-many retweet or comment — but Snapchat users are encouraged to communicate through stories: to scribble on them, fill in the blanks, and, yes, use owl videos to express how they feel. Snapchat’s media partners have become messengers and professional meme makers; aggressively spreading their brands through Snapchat’s network by providing the digital postcards for users’ conversations. Soon, on Snapchat, expect to find a professional meme for every mood.Where Snapchat Stories Begin: With you and Kylie.The world of Snapchat is split in two hemispheres: the one-to-one messaging that draws in users like catnip, and “Stories,” montages of various kinds made by your friends as well as brands and celebrities. Just one left-swipe from Snapchat’s selfie home screen, the Stories page is divided into three parts. “Recent Updates,” “Live” and “Discover” sort the app’s three kinds of stories: personal, crowd-sourced, and professional.Recent Updates showcases short composite videos and photos from accounts you follow, in which users stitch together recent Snaps into a story of sorts, which expire after 24 hours. Here, I have seen friends’ selfies and sunsets and watched Diplo race through approximately 437 airports. I have seen multiple presidential candidates get both on and off planes. I have viewed several promotional clips from HBO’s Girls, and I’ve become one of the ten million followers of Snapchat’s most popular user, Kylie Jenner, who seemed to enjoy her dinner last night.In the Live section, stories are assembled by Snapchat editors. Advertisers often pay Snapchat to highlight these crowd-sourced montages, which explains why it’s chock full of trade shows. During the Super Bowl, I watched shaky footage of an extra point kick from many awful angles, and followed along as a family took its seats in the upper decks. Meanwhile, I noticed that the presidential primary race “stories” in Live studiously avoid controversy, like curated tweets on a CNN chyron. Instead of seeing #BlackLivesMatter protesters getting shoved out of a Trump rally, I watched volunteers cheering outside the morning polling booths — usually as the primary votes are being tallied later that night, since Live stories are usually not, well, live. (Discover stories are published once every 24 hours, like old-timey newspapers.) It’s obvious why advertisers would want to pay to put these videos in front of viewers. It’s less obvious why users would watch them. Mostly, Snapchat Live has felt like someone saying: Yes, that touchdown yesterday was incredible, but you should have seen the deviled eggs at the Vanity Fair pre-game party!“The key to success is just to make it,” DJ Khaled said on his misbegotten jet-ski misadventure, one of the first Snapchat stories to go viral. Like most of DJ Khaled’s Yogi Berra-ish koans, that nugget is full of compelling personality and empty of any particular meaning — just like most Snapchat stories.Once you make it through those first two sorts of stories, you reach the VIP room: Snapchat Discover, which Fortune has called the “hottest club in town” for media execs, since media outlets are desperate to get in and the app has admitted just twenty members.That said, Snapchat’s bouncer has an odd door policy: The guest list currently includes new media companies (BuzzFeed, Vice, Fusion, Mashable, Vox, Refinery29, Sweet, Tastemade, iHeartRadio, IGN), media stalwarts (Daily Mail, CNN, Cosmopolitan, People, WSJ, National Geographic), and cable networks (ESPN, MTV, Comedy Central, Food Network). Original invitees Yahoo and Warner Music went home early, reportedly because they didn’t fit in. (Disclosure: I’m a columnist at Cosmopolitan and I’ve written for The Wall Street Journal.)As you might expect, the digital-savvy brands that already reach younger readers walk into the club like they own the place. Vox’s explainers are beautifully adapted to the format, often telling one clean multi-part story each day, whether breaking down the economic value of a college education or the history of the meme font. MTV and Comedy Central, who already have rosters of original online video stars (James Davis, Laci Green, Amani Al-Khatatbeh) and stockpiles of clips to repurpose, thrive here, too. They take short-form video seriously, even if that just means finding better ways to tell cat jokes, as in MTV’s repurposed “Kittyoke,” in which stars sing karaoke songs by replacing notes with meows.“The demographic on Snapchat is much different from the demographic that’s reading People right now,” one Time Inc. exec recently told Digiday — and, if you spend much time on People’s channel, that seems pretty obvious. The day after the Grammys, People (median reader age: 41) posted 18 stories; 14 of them prominently featured Taylor Swift. There’s a legit hunger for Bey and Tay, but companies like Buzzfeed have proven there are organic ways to create GIFs without pandering like you’re the Papa Johns Twitter account.On Snapchat, outlets like People and CNN often come off as parents trying to make conversation in the minivan on the way home from soccer practice, trusting SEO metrics like it’s their GPS. Even more puzzling is Snapchat’s partnership with Daily Mail. The British tabloid has more print readers over the age of 65 than under the age of 54, and recently pushed onto Snapchat this dumb story about a UFO that was obviously not a UFO. Also confounding is why, if the guest list is so selective, much of the content is amateurish, as in Tastemade’s “Food Fight: Cupcakes vs. Muffins,” which clarifies that “cupcakes are ultimately miniature versions of whole cakes. They have cake. They have frosting. Hence the name — cupcake.” The Internet is already hip-deep in such bullshit; Snapchat Discover promised quality and didn’t have to add more slop to the trough.A Newsstand Inside a Messaging AppSo how should we make sense of the mishmash of storytelling inside this $16 billion media world darling? Snapchat is not a news app, it’s a messaging app. What’s innovative about Stories isn’t that media outlets get to pander to young readers on yet another platform, it’s the way those outlets are integrating themselves into users’ messages and reshaping the way they socialize. Snapchat’s claim that Discover “is not social media” misses the point. It’s the most social media I’ve ever seen, but in new ways.That National Geographic “You’re a hoot” owl video? It was built for you to send directly to a friend (or group of friends) on Snapchat, maybe with a little personal scribble to turn it into your very own “Snapsterpiece.” You don’t just retweet a story to anonymous followers, or share a link with all your “friends” on Facebook. It’s more intimate than that. The meme becomes your message, like a self-destructing Hallmark card.Alongside G-rated owl jokes, the country’s most august media outlets are producing an experimental, motley mix of fill-in-the-blank cards in the style of O magazine, Mad-Libs-style mood statements, multiple-choice personality quizzes, and a smorgasbord of personalizable GIFs, sponsored geofilters, and which-Kardashian-are-you quizzes: the next-gen, shareable equivalent of schoolyard cootie-catchers and MASH games.Recently, I found what might be the purest shareable Snap: a half-drawn face, with the rest left to be filled in. Here’s the complete text: “Today I feel _______.”Other posts are more labored, like this one from People that tries way too hard: “Dear [name of bff] you are the [celebrity] to my [member of celebrity’s squad], spending time [favorite activity] with you makes me happier than [favorite food]. You will always be my favorite person — at least until [hot dude] finally falls in love with me.”By comparison, Buzzfeed recently posted a single shareable image: a guy sitting on the toilet with his pants down, with the thought bubbles: “listen up if you have time to POOP you have time to text me back.”This is all, admittedly, ridiculous. But if Snapchat Discover says something about the future of media, this is what’s new about it. Most of these shareable images and videos aren’t even watermarked or branded so that recipients will know which company created them. These companies aren’t trying to multiply brand impressions or become the subject of conversation. They’re trying to be the conversation.Media companies have always tried to channel how their readers feel. On Snapchat, they’re following people into their most private, intimate, or goofy messages, framing their conversations with kitten GIFs, Disney princess memes, and poop jokes. It’s absurd and fun, more seamless than media companies’ meme-making forays into Tumblr or Twitter, and it marks a clear shift in the relationship between media and consumers.Media brands once created content that people simply consumed, then they focused on producing content that people shared. Discover feels like an odd laboratory for what comes next, where media companies are experimenting with short-form entertainment, journalism, and what is essentially multimedia stationery: open templates and professional memes for every minute, for every mood.When you care to send the very best on Snapchat, you can still send your own unfiltered message, or you can screengrab a short Discover post, maybe add a filter or scribble a message to tell a friend that this Monday really sucks, or you hate going to the gym, or that you’re trying to channel your inner Beyoncé today. More than ever, it seems, companies are going to have to listen to what their audiences are saying, in order to help them express how they feel. Already, it’s clear on Discover which brands are really connected to young readers, and which are just reading SEO charts.Of course, branding isn’t contained to Discover on Snapchat, as the whole app integrates more advertising to generate revenue. “Live” stories are often sponsored without attribution. Celebrities regularly endorse products. And advertisers have been turning the app’s essential photo-video messaging service into a meme machine with sponsored filters from advertisers. Recently, selfie-taking users have been able to slap Samsung VR visors on their faces, dump virtual Gatorade coolers over their heads, and paste Dunkin Donuts pumpkin-flavored beverages in front of their lips. Largely, these filters are fun novelty gags, but they’re also a new frontier: advertisers’ foray into a core function of the app that was unbranded during the app’s rise to ubiquity.I keep thinking of that old poem, “America,” by Allen Ginsberg:Will young users let their emotional lives be filtered through brands on Snapchat? Do they feel like these brands belong in their private conversations? That they’re just silly fun? Or will the app’s users begin to feel like these brands — media companies included — are being too pushy?I have no idea. But since every third story on Discover mentions Taylor Swift, I’ll conclude by quoting her song “We Know Places.” They are the hunters, we are the foxes… And we run. Just about every youth-driven company eventually takes it too far, and when the vibe is off, as Tay sings, young people run for the fences— and onto the next new thing.After all, that’s how they found Snapchat.