SHAKESPEARE’S PIZZA: Delicious Local FlavorToday is Small Business Saturday. Now I’m someone who knows a thing or two about building a small business. Before Wine Library was a $60M a year company, it was a large local liquor store in NJ ( I still think that my dad coming here with $100 bucks and not speaking English and creating Shopper Liquors is still a bigger accomplishment than anything I have done) . Before VayneMedia was a 300+ person, ground-breaking( if I say so myself) agency, it was me, my brother AJ, and a few of his friends in a borrowed corner of the Buddy Media offices. So when I say I have nothing but love and respect for small business owners the world over, I mean it, damnit.With this in mind, I wanted to share two case studies from my new book that focus on small businesses that get it right on social. These guys are putting in the time and effort to figuring out these platforms and creatively executing on them, even as they focus on the day-to-day of growing their businesses.I’m happy to praise yet another small business that has made a strong commitment to putting out good micro-content, and has a talented writer creating their copy, too.Pay attention—this tweet seems like a simple response to Earth Day, but look at the clever hashtag. That hashtag shows that this company gets the psyche of a Twitter user, that it understands that it’s those little moments that make consumers go “Ha!” that compel them to retweet to friends and put your brand in their feeds. Shakespeare’s Pizza could have paid for a banner ad to get an impression, but no one would have cared.The third tweet is on point, too. Anyone between the ages of sixteen and twenty-four is going to be all in. Heck, it will appeal to anyone with the mentality of a sixteen- to twenty-four-year-old—you know who you are, hit me up on Twitter. Shakespeare’s tweets prove that a combination of creative writing and a deep understanding of what brings people to Twitter will lead a brand to overindex. They also made me hungry. For the record, I like mushrooms.SURF TACOS: Feeding new platformsThis isn’t the greatest jab of all time, but I thought it would be a good idea to show some lightweight moves that won’t revolutionize the social media world but do provide some examples of easy things you can do so you don’t feel pressured to create masterpiece after masterpiece.★ Good cross-­pollination: Surf Taco has a respectable following on Twitter of about 6,400 followers. They have about 500 on Instagram. By pushing an Instagram picture on Twitter, they’re wisely using their bigger pool of followers to increase the size of their smaller one. This is a strategy more people need to follow, although pushing Instagram to Twitter worked better before competition between the two meant that Twitter cut off seamless Instagram integration, so that it would no longer load natively. However, when you are trying to develop a following on a new platform, whether it’s Pinterest, Instagram, Snapchat, or whatever we’ll see in the future, it’s important to use the platform where you have the most data to drive traffic to the new one (three years ago I was telling people to use their email service to drive traffic to Facebook). Siphoning data from place to place is an excellent strategic move to build awareness of your presence on a new platform.★ Appropriate aesthetic: Surf Taco also clearly understands the aesthetic of Instagram. This isn’t a particularly artistic or exciting shot, but at least they’re not using a stock photo or a glossy product picture. It’s a casual, natural scene from a real place, and based on the solid engagement it received, even from a relatively small community, it resonated with followers.They also knew enough about Twitter users to include a hashtag, and a good one, too, though it might have been smart to include one or two broad hashtags, like “#baseball,” to try to earn even greater visibility.All in all, not a bad play by a small New Jersey business.If you liked these, there are over EIGHTY more of them in the book. Grab your copy now, because there is literally nothing else like it in this space.