The Business of Social Media AddictionHow It StartedWhat is Social Media Addiction?A Way OutA couple years ago, I was hanging out with a bunch of friends at a local coffee shop when my phone started buzzing. I immediately checked it and saw that a friend has favorited a sarcastic tweet I pushed an hour earlier. A quick glance at his username made my heart beat faster, for some reason. It triggered something.The friend in question is someone who has tens of thousands of followers on Twitter and is viewed by many as one of the most popular and awesome people out there. I recall how the sight of the number of RTs to his tweets made me feel a tiny grudge. Seeing his avatar under my tweet in the interactions tab made me revisit the tweet and try to analyze what was extremely awesome about it for him to favorite it. I thought to myself: “Wow, that must have been the right hit at the right time. I’m now closer to the league of awesome people. Maybe this means I can call him up some day to hang out. I can imagine what posting a selfie with him on my Facebook feed would do to my friends. That’s just pure awesomeness”. As I was thinking this, another notification showed up, the “awesome” guy retweeted my tweet! My heart just started pounding.I started flicking the Interactions tab rapidly, and it was consistently updated with more people who retweeted and , favorited tweet. Many even started following me. I raised my head up for a minute to tell a friend who has been sitting next to me at the coffee shop about what was going on on Twitter, only to find that he, along with most of the group were already gone.. The only one left at the table was paying for her drink, when I asked where did everyone go, she said: “They left, I was trying to nudge you but you wouldn’t hear it”.Right at that moment, it all started to sink in: I am a social media addict.As soon as I started my career in social media marketing, I learnt about the nature of branding in the digital era, and practiced it myself. In my introductory training to new social media practitioners, I tell fellow marketers that people on social media are here for their story, not for their product. They should engage people into conversations that matter to them.Think about it, you can list three to five favorite brands you follow online, be it a local bakery, an indie artist or a content publisher. They “speak” to you.Successful brands are by default the ones who address the audience’s needs. In social media, it’s the everlasting need to belong, and feel worthy.Take for example, Dove’s “Real Beauty Sketches” campaign. One thing made this campaign the success it is, it exposed the real anxiety women face, and gave it an answer. It provided a solution to a deeply-rooted perception that ruins the way women live, love and work.But, here’s the problem: A lot of women still go on Instagram and feel unattractive. Many women still go on Facebook and feel lonely. Others, look for retouching apps which allow them to post better selfies. Many women still feel the urge to stay, drill for content to share in exchange for a sense of worthiness, measured in likes. Women still purchase Dove’s products to feel beautiful.In “Real Beauty Sketches”, this was Dove’s message:The campaign was widely celebrated, I personally thought it was the best piece of marketing that has ever existed. But alas, it did not last.. The deep struggle with society’s beauty standards is still there, the same perceptions and behaviors are there. Nothing really changed — except Dove’s sales revenues.We need more.Here’s what I have learned five years into the profession after a lot of research about online behavior:I figured that our generation’s collective effort of seeking reassurance to the perfect versions we think we should be is what’s draining our real presence in the world, causing rising levels of depression, anxiety and substance abuse. Brands compete over forging stories that provide validation to audiences in exchange of recognition. And by brands I mean every single account on social media, yours included.Thinking about an exit plan took me months to figure out. In that regard, quitting social media altogether was the worst option possible. No matter what I do, or how hard I tried, I would always come back.I realized it had to come from within.I came across a various multitude of ideas about self-perception while undergoing therapy from anxiety. Only one inspired me to dig deeper and left a tremendous impact on me and therefore a huge change in the way I live.This journey taught me that social media addiction is not a website’s fault. The challenge is to be honest, let myself embrace vulnerability, and seek compassionate connection only from people who have earned the right to listen. I used to be an addict because I couldn’t fully bond with anything else, yet I still have a chance to claim my own story, that was a major relief.Within this new context, social media can serve me as the valuable tool it is, I learned that only a poor workman blames his tools.