Full disclosure: I work for an advertising agency. The opinions below are my own and not the views of my employer.At ten years old I built a small reputation for my online self using what we now call social media. I was in the 5th grade. I just finished programming a jersey design into NHL 97 and threw together some mocks. I then shared my latest creation with what is now the TBN forum where interest and engagement were measured not by “Likes,” but instead in batch file requests.Thirteen years later I landed my first agency gig in Los Angeles as a social strategist. During a time when social media was booming, I saw it as my way into the agency world. Now after 5 modest years working as a strategist to Fortune 500 and challenger brands, I see social strategy nearing its standardization as a skill-set. Without reinvention, I believe the role of the social strategist will soon become obsolete.You may find it shocking, innovative or otherwise, but there’s no doubt the role of the social strategist is no longer as nebulous as it was 3-4 years ago. However, one thing it still lacks is a clear development trajectory that blends a digital native’s skill-set with the fundamentals of marketing, consumer insight and sound business acumen.Having worked closely with and within a few social media departments, I’ve always noticed at least one of two things surface (if not both):Maybe it is the lack of leadership or misguided recruiting strategies but most social media teams I’ve come across exemplify one, if not both, of the above. As a result, most social strategists are perceived as expendable when it comes to contributing underlying value.83% of the Internet population between the ages of 18-29 use social media — meaning its applicable in the near future will become homogeneous with the ability to use PowerPoint today. Whether it’s an art director or marketing client, social strategy as a skill-set will become implicit amongst the next wave of professionals in the creative, marketing and advertising industries; prompting the role of a social strategist into a commodity.Since the role of the social strategist has little to do with gathering consumer insights (i.e. What’s our Pinterest strategy?), many brands are even bringing social media in-house. A part of what’s behind the shift has to do with how agencies structure social media, more specifically what department social strategists fall under. Often times they sit alongside community managers which in respect to a strategic function completely undermines the role.I imagine some agencies have figured this type of thing out. But for most, I see social media departments being forced to pivot their offering to meet the advanced needs of their clients and maintain a competitive edge amongst not only counter-departments but also other agencies in general.The Internet is our client’s biggest competition. 26% of people’s time is spent online. It’s full of interesting entertainment, but most importantly it’s full of value.Yet, in most agencies, there’s no single department dedicated to uncovering the insights of the digital consumer and translating them into informed brand communication strategies. They do a great job assessing the big picture, but many don’t dig deep into behaviors within digital.Herein lies the opportunity for the social strategist — less platform dependency and more insightful thinking around the larger context of behaviors within digital, how they affect their client’s business and ways to leverage them to influence behavior.These are just some thoughts based on my own experience around a topic I’m extremely passionate about. My hope is to incite conversation and connect with other industry leaders evolving the organizations and clients they work for.