We Need to Screen Social Media Posts (And Not Just for Visa Applicants).UPDATE: The NYT added an editor’s note to the original piece cited in this article, significantly revising the post and challenging the organization’s fact-checking process. I still maintain my views on screening public social media posts of visa applicants.On Saturday, The New York Times wrote that San Bernadino attacker Tashfeen Malik’s extremist remarks on social media didn’t stop her from obtaining a “fiancée visa” and entering the United States. The Times reported that Malik underwent extensive screening before her visa was granted, including three security and criminal background checks against US and foreign databases and two in-person interviews by a consular officer and later by an immigration officer.To a lay person like me, this sounds pretty thorough. It would seem that there’s nothing more we can do to ensure that jihadists don’t enter the country without unfairly and ineffiently limiting access to the millions of people who come here with good intentions, including legions of skilled professionals and students who pay taxes and tuition that benefit our economy.But then, bafflingly, officials from Homeland Security are quoted as saying:“Tens of millions of people are cleared each year to come to this country…It is impossible to conduct an exhaustive investigation and scour the social media accounts of each of them.”From where I sit in San Francisco, this contention is absurd. The cost of the current process is at the very least a few thousand dollars per applicant, accounting for the full cost of US officials conducting this sort of review, staffing at US embassies that take in visa applicants, and the processing of paperwork.That we can spend thousands of dollars screening a visa applicant and then claim it “impossible” to review him or her on social media is a cop-out. Several Silicon Valley firms, including my own, use automated techniques and human review to screen social media accounts in a process known as sentiment analysis. Companies like ours conduct this work routinely and could probably perform basic social media background checks for under $25 per person, a tiny fraction of the overall cost of a visa application.Similar techniques are used today to identify inappropriate or offensive content on popular websites. We can tell companies whether people’s remarks on them skew negative or positive, whether their brands are doing better or worse over time, and categorize social media posts based on type of comment for their marketing teams. We can perform these types of tasks on content in a range of languages, including Urdu and Arabic. Even if we relied entirely on human review, with no algorithmic input, we could quite easily identify edge cases and pass them on to authorities for review prior to the interview process. A modest add-on to the existing five-step background check could bring our visa screening process into the Twenty-First Century.Does this encourage the government to spy on us more broadly? Am I suggesting we turn over our private data to Uncle Sam? No and no. Social media posts are not private data. Our posts are public, and they must be subject to reasonable limits on free speech. If I join a protest and hold up signs that identify me as someone who wishes to violently harm others, if I stand on a street corner and shout that I want to kill my neighbors or colleagues, I’m yelling fire in a crowded theater and fail the popular test for free speech — I pose an immediate and present danger. At the very least, the government has a duty to understand whether my posts pose a threat to other citizens. At most, the government has a duty to regulate this type of speech. This is a much lower level of scrutiny, than, say, wiretapping.But surely we only need this kind of scrutiny for visa applicants, right? I’m convinced that these rules should apply equally to US citizens and residents. I don’t believe in borders, and I don’t believe many other millennials do either — the Internet has rendered borders obsolete in the world of ideas.We can no more “keep out” extremist views and people from our homeland than we can keep out funny cat videos. That’s the price of global connectivity, a price we willingly pay for the incredible benefit of free worldwide communication, knowledge, and community.Domestic terrorism, like the kind we saw in Colorado, is also linked to hate speech and extremism. In the past, we couldn’t know the views of many killers because there was no traceable public outlet for their views. Today, they shout them from Facebook and Twitter profiles. They use apps like Telegram (whose founder chose to blame Socialism for the tragic Paris attacks rather than examine how he might scrub his platform of terrorist plots), to communicate and plan sophisticated attacks. These types of communication generate data that can more easily be examined and analyzed than the analog records of the past.Mass shootings in the United States will continue until we dissolve the political gridlock around gun control. But at the very least, while our politicians debate, the Department of Homeland Security should take steps to add social media screening to the visa application process. The FBI and local law enforcement should add basic social media screening to their existing techniques to prevent horrific crimes.In an era of increasing population density, access to capital, and easy-to-procure killing machines, we need to change the way we examine terror threats. Social media is the new street corner. It should be subject to the same rules of public safety.Leila Janah is the CEO and Founder of Samasource, a non-profit data services company that operates in East Africa, South Asia and Latin America. She is based in San Francisco. You can sign up for updates from Leila here.