Blockchain SocialSocial media is the killer app for bitcoin. Here are the top reasons why.Facebook and other social media companies sell your personal information to advertisers in order to earn money. If Alice writes something that Bob reads, Facebook does not make it possible for Bob to pay Alice anything, and yet Facebook earns money from Alice’s content by advertising to Bob. All social media companies work the same way — they earn all the money, and the users, who create all the value, earn nothing*. This is because in the early web, peer-to-peer payments weren’t possible, so there was no way for Bob to pay Alice. Companies resorted to advertising to make up for the lack of peer-to-peer payments. However, bitcoin makes peer-to-peer payments possible. With bitcoin, when Alice creates great content, Bob can simply pay her.A lot of users don’t care that Facebook knows what their sexual preferences are, when they last used the restroom, and how much they like the government on a scale of one to ten, but some do. If you’ve read 1984 and would rather not consciously submit to a totalitarian nightmare, but would still like to shares selfies with your friends and post pics of your family vacation with an app created by a startup in Silicon Valley, you can now do so, because you can simply pay that company for the services they provide rather than giving them all your personal information which they sell to third party advertisers.Imagine if you didn’t have to use an ad blocker because you could just pay people for stuff on the internet. Ah, yes, that would be nice.If someone has ever deleted a comment you have made because they disagreed with you, silencing you with no recourse, you have experienced censorship. Sometimes censorship is a minor irritation, but sometimes it is a weapon used by the powerful to silence their enemies. Either way, censorship is never a good thing. Content that is hashed and put on the blockchain has a permanent record in the World’s Transaction History secured by the most powerful supercomputer and can never be erased. A decentralized storage system like IPFS or a DHT can store the actual content itself. Although not everyone will store your comment, everyone will be able to find it if they want to.Not only is it bad when your content is censored, but it is bad when other people censor content that you want to view. Peer-to-peer moderation is where you decide who moderates the content that you see. You can opt-in to moderators that remove spam from your feed, and opt-out of moderators that try to manipulate what you think and believe. Since content is censorship-resistant, it is always possible to opt-out of moderation, unlike with centralized social media.Wouldn’t it be nice if people always knew who the real author of a piece of content was, so when they pay for that content, they can be sure the real author is getting a fair share? A record of who created what can be pinned to the blockchain so it is always possible to find the original author of a piece of content.Not only can the original author be found, but if the author were to sell their content, the current rightful owner can also be found. When digital property changes hands, a record is kept on IPFS or a DHT, and pinned to the blockchain. Imagine if you produced a great article, but rather than continue to earn money for the lifetime of that article, you would like to sell ownership to someone else for one large payment in order to buy a home. People who buy that article later on can know that you have sold the article and will be able to pay the current rightful owner.You and your band may produce an album together, shared on a social media app, and agree to split revenue equally. Ownership can be divided and tracked separately, so that each person gets paid in the proportion they agreed. They can later sell their portion, or use it in other advanced financial contracts.Is something news, or old news? If an author signs the latest block hash, they have proved that their signature is new, because no one knows what the next block hash will be until it happens. Similarly, content pinned to the blockchain on a certain date is known to be at least that old, because it is not possible to rewrite the blockchain — it only grows. News is provably new; and ancient archival data is provably old.These are just some of the ways bitcoin will improve social media. With the help of collaborators, I am building Datt, a social media app based on bitcoin. Join our Slack channel or mailing list if you would like to help, or perhaps just hear about the launch of the MVP.*There are some exceptions, of course. YouTube lets content producers earn money by sharing a portion of payments. But this is only effective for very popular users, and with a huge tax. And they still don’t let users simply pay peer-to-peer.