Ode to FriendFeed, or what we want from social mediaHere I am, trying to save 6 years worth of FriendFeed posts by my friends. Cool links, funny little conversations, ongoing/unending debates, in-jokes — and multiple recursive iterations of them — that generated so much laughter over the years, the support we gave each other during moments of despair, pictures of snow and rain and spring, taken from our windows around the world, and a lot of actual, bona fide art. If you believe that that latter word really describes a distinct category of human endeavor, it won’t take much to convince you that all the literature, music, drawings, photos, and abstract creations posted on this particular medium — and created for the sole purpose of sharing with the people who frequent this medium — deserve that word no less than what many actually pay money to enjoy.It is hard to convey how much this space has meant to us all these years, how much of our lives actually happened here, and with its impending deletion, how much we will lose. People who met on FF went on to found projects that grew to attract nationwide attention. Some of us have traveled great distances to see each other in person, and stayed at each other’s homes, becoming friends for life. We met and lost a dear friend, a brilliant, troubled soul. We learned from each other, read books, listened to music, and watched movies that we would never have heard of, were it not for this quirky little corner of the internet. And on and on and on.Other tools that connect people have undoubtedly enabled similar things, but something about the immediacy, cleanness, and — perhaps, best of all — the left-alone-ness of this place has allowed us to connect in ways we haven’t managed to in any of the other, more common tools that we use. It is hard to pin down what exactly made this place what it was, but certain deceptively simple design decisions perhaps had something to do with it. One had the feeling that content and conversation actually mattered here. We were not forced to bathe in and respond to shallow lukewarm waters rapidly flowing around us all the time. We could stop, search the past, go back and deep in old conversations, follow up on old debates and memories. And we could stay shallow, too, when we felt like it, and often did so with great gusto.Facebook owns this service and the data on it, and can pull the plug when it wishes. This is, no doubt, the legal truth, but it is worth thinking about the moral truth, as well, and not just for the sake of this particular website. The value of cultural artifacts and certain intangibles can be very difficult to assess, especially if you are looking at them from a distance. How valuable is a song? A linguistic innovation? A sense of community? A motivation to come together and fix things? A demonstration of the fact that people can go out of their ways to help ease the pain of others they haven’t even met in person? How valuable is the totality of all the connections between a mass of people, and the livelihood of the interactions in a community?This is something that has happened before (remember GeoCities?), and will likely happen again. We will run towards a new service, and by our mere presence, make it worth money. We will create content; culture, art, conversations, connections, which will only attract more people, and bring more value. We won’t get asked to pay anything, and will thus forfeit our claims to ownership, and perhaps even be thankful to the free service we get. And when the time comes, the plug will be pulled.I have nothing but gratitude for the FriendFeed team and for the few of them who are still at Facebook, who have undoubtedly had to take time away from their main work to maintain the site and keep it alive all these years. But I can’t help feeling a bit of an outrage. We are all downloading old posts by our friends as fast as we can, and the Archive.org team is rushing to save as much of the content as they can for posterity, just as they did with GeoCities. But why is this an acceptable end? Why is the destruction of certain cultural artifacts in one corner of the world is worthy of outrage, but the deletion of a whole vibrant, creative community distributed across oceans, with many person-years of cultural innovation and creation is acceptable because of the terms of service? We need to think about this, and find ways out of this.Thanks to the worldwide FF community who have been sharing one touching parting thought after another during these last days, and thanks once again to the FF team for creating this place.