Tips for Becoming a Social Media InfluencerWhat if everyday people came to you for social media advice? How did you get to the point to where others trust your judgement?Posting valuable content on social media that actually stands out from the lemmings and offers systems that work with evidence will grab the attention of the masses.My name is Justin Matthew also known as Jmhhacker and yes I am a social media influencer.I was 1st introduced to social media through YouTube when I became the business manager of the Viral Youtube channel Householdhacker. At the time I took over, the channel had 1.5 million subscribers (Currently approaching 4 million.) My duty was to handle business negotiations as I had previous experience having been a stockbroker from the age of 20 to 28.As I watched and learned I saw immediately how valuable social media was. Upon new video releases promoting the videos via social media increased views and hitting the front page of Youtube. This led to interviews with ABC, Myth Busters, Leno and many more.Check out this short write up from the Daily DotEventually I saw an opportunity to really go ALL IN and make a play to teach and help others about the benefits of social media marketing. One of the very 1st items to focus on is to master a specific topic. That way you can become an actual expert on that topic rather then just knowing a little about a lot. Either focus on one social media industry which could be marketing, advertising etc.Or a platform like Facebook, Twitter or Instagram. For example, going as JMHHACKER at the time in 2012. I decided to focus my attention on the micro services platform fiverr.com. As you can see below at one point my fiverr url was ranked 232 in the USA with over 41,000 sites linking in.At the time I hardly new anything about social media except my limited experience with Householdhacker but was a fast study.The Fiverr website was launched in early 2010 and by 2012 was hosting over 1.3 million Gigs. In just 6 months I was the #1 overall seller out of MILLIONS. The website transaction volume has grown 600% since 2011.I was receiving daily deposits of 300 to 3,000 dollars. I did this everyday for 1 year and have to say it was the best training anyone could have ever received.I became a master at every network from Tumblr to Facebook or Twitter to Google+ etc. It got to the point where I was writing guides on each network and selling them for 5, 10, 15, even 50 dollars.Direct payments from fiverr to my Paypal as you can see from my email.Additionally, Fiverr.com has been ranked among the top 100 most popular sites in the U.S. and top 150 in the world since the beginning of 2013. Well I managed to figure out a secret or method that not 1 other person was doing at the time. Honestly to my knowledge no one has still cracked the method.As you can see here only a few months in is over 45 k in earnings.In a matter of 2 months I went from 100 gigs sold to 5,000 then 5,000 to 15,000 until eventually selling 25,000 gigs at an average net profit of $9 per gig. Also maintained a 100% rating. Here is another photo of just some of the earnings I enjoyed my 1st few months.So in literally 12 months time I was able to net over 200,000 thousand dollars. I became a social media influencer immediately but also something a bit more as this had never been seen so publicly on that platform. I became the go to guy for those looking for advice on fiverr and making money online. This led to interviews such as The Fiverr King .Then came numerous podcasts and even phone consultations where I would offer advice for $100 to $500 per call and lets just say I had a waiting list.Check out episode 2 from the Great Business Project for my 1st podcast taken 6 months after entering social media.Check it out here! Great Business Project: Episode 2 With Justin MatthewThis expanded my own social networks and led to who I considered to be elite influencers hiring me and asking me questions. So just like that I was the expert and influencer.Very important be sure to stay on top of all the relevant blogs and latest news. Study news, expert opinions and case studies that are published or shared by people you trust.As you continue to learn and have even more results to show your readers continue to publish on your own blog to keep a presence.As you continue to build a name for yourself you need to ask yourself what is your GOAL here? To make money by selling others your methods? Or to become something more?I continued to climb and reached the pinnacle of social media as I knew it at the time. In 2012 reaching Kred Influencer HEREReceiving awards from KLOUT at the same time. Finishing #5 ranking worldwide in 2012As I received these awards I was not shy about posting about them and how they can benefit anyone in growing their brand online.If you hope to be viewed as an influencer, you need to demonstrate that you’re always aware of the latest news. Even better know what changes are coming even before they’ve been released and you write about it 1st. Now that you have accomplished major successes people respect and will follow your every word.#7 Top Klout ExpertBe sure to write blog posts and publish consistently. You should shoot to publish at least two to three times each week.To be frank I spoke about any new achievements I received, along with any other new methods to target or build new platforms on social mediaIn addition to your own content, partner with other influencers. Interview them, invite them to contribute to your blog or run a promotion together that gets shared on everyone’s sites.As I continued to do this large companies started taking notice and I eventually moved on from fiverr. I was hired by 5 or 6 small to medium sized businesses doing anywhere from 2 to 40 million in sales.So just like that I founded my 1st social media firm which eventually turned into where I am now IBoom media. We have 20 staff and over 150 clients and business has only grown each month. To stay in the loop and in front of peoples thoughts on social, I still publish my own articles and still back it ALL up with actual evidence as I always have.To be considered an influencer, people need to see you as a resource. To prove just that I make sure I stay on top of most social influencer lists and I am sure to write about it. WHY? Because it shows directly that this approach is successful. Take a look at a few recent lists!Check it out here: Digital Marketing Show UK Top 100Always remember To be an influencer, you need to be seen. Social media influencers regularly take part in relevant conversations across a variety of networks. I make sure to break away for a few hours a week just for this purpose. Online Influencer Top 100 ListJoin the leaderboard and discover where you stand against the world’s top online influencers. Get a weekly notification about your score and rank on the Online Influencer leaderboard.Click on the Join link to start playing on the online influencer leaderboard today.Also, engage regularly across platforms. Don’t just tweet, post, comment, like and share. Add your comments and opinions. Sharing your knowledge is how you’ll truly stand out as an influencer. IT WILL PAY OFF as IBoom Media was just named one of the top marketing companies to keep an eye on by another powerhouse influencer Jeff BullasI hope these examples of actual proof through my short 4 year online career will motivate many of you to never stop and to listen to yourself and not the haters. Contact us @ IBOOM MEDIAOriginally published at www.jmhhacker.com on October 8, 2015.