Start talking. Tweet more. Post more. Follow interesting stuff. Just, be active online.Dennis CoventAs Lead Designer of iCapps I challenge myself to be good in more then just designing nice pixels. Of course designing awesome Mobile User Interfaces is the most important task. But for me, this is a wide term. It’s taking the client on a inspiring journey: conceptual thinking, wireframing, User Experience Design, User Interface Design, prototypes, build &amp; test the app and adjusting.There are so more other things: meetings with clients, manage our social media, following up projects, working together with 2 great designers, following new trends, …All this above would be way more difficult if I wouldn’t be active online. For me it’s very important that I can build a network. My network keeps me up-to-date. I love Twitter. I love the people that I follow and the ones that follow me.If you search for my name on Google you’ll see in one glance that I’m a designer. You can see what I do. Day in, day out.2 months ago we placed a job opening on our website for a Mobile User Interface designer. I received many applications.Here are 3 things that bothered me.Being passionate doesn’t mean you are a good designer. But it reflects the eager to learn every day.In the past years I had many job offers because of a few Dribbble shots that hit the popular page.San Francisco, New York, London, Barcelona… Many of them were great opportunities but I luckily I had some chances in Ghent and Antwerp too, because I didn’t want to leave Belgium.-&gt; Opportunities because I’m active on social platforms.In the past years I’ve made many connections with designers from Belgium, but also from all over the world. Some became good friends.-&gt; Opportunities because I’m active on social platforms.In 1 year, 2 iOS developers joined iCapps because I found them on Twitter.-&gt; Opportunities because I’m active on social platforms. And they are too of course.My network is growing, day after day. There are many opportunities out there. Many information. Many connections. I have the chance to connect with all of that. And the other way around.-&gt; Opportunities because I’m active on social platforms.All startups are screaming: Stop talking, start building.Let’s give that a little twist.I’ll share a few resources and interesting people to start with.On Twitter:More: https://twitter.com/denniscovent/followingResources:My Twitter:https://twitter.com/denniscoventWebsite:http://denniscovent.com/Dribbble:http://dribbble.com/denniscoventLinkedin:http://www.linkedin.com/profile/view?id=292376981Follow iCapps on Twitter:https://twitter.com/icappsThanks Maxime De Greve to double check and proofread my post.And thanks Nick Looijmans to improve some parts.