On Black Social Media and Sisterhood♬ Listen to this Story or Read itI didn’t have many Black girl friends growing up. It’s hard to admit, but it’s the truth. This is partially because there weren’t many Black girls where I came from — but it’s equally fair to say that I didn’t seek out their friendship. I went to school with almost entirely white people, and instead of embracing my Blackness, finding refuge in the few Black people that were there, I forsook it. I hated the parts of me that made it hard to exist at ease, I tried to stifle them. I avoided the girls who reflected me, tried to shrink my Blackness, hide from it. In turn, they avoided me, could smell the betrayal on my breath.I know that I was young, and trying to cope, but it’s one of the deepest regrets of my life. It took way too long for me to recognize the importance of Black sisterhood. I endured all kinds of abuse, many brands of belittlement, for the sake of sisterhood with women who couldn’t connect to a large chunk of my struggle (and often outright denied it). I missed out on learning to love myself through loving the girls going through the same things. I hated myself instead, silenced the parts of myself that needed to speak.I’ve been sorting through that hate, lately. Where it comes from, where to put it, how to process it, eradicate it. I’ve sorted through a lot of it publicly, I’m pretty open on the internet. I tend to type the things I wouldn’t use my tongue for, so I’ve been tweeting a lot about my struggles with depression and anxiety: with forgiving myself, with learning to like myself. I’ve received an influx of support, love, and validation — predominantly from other Black women.This is paramount to me, this communion. This is me learning that I’m not alone, learning that there are countless other Black girls and women like me going (and getting) through it. This is feeling validated by someone who understands. This is being called sis by someone who feels familiar. Internet hugs. Being told I matter by those who know how badly Black women need to hear that sometimes. I’m so lucky to have another chance at this — Black sisterhood.This era (and the eras before it) has been hard on Black women. We need each other, the tenderness and understanding that so often only we are willing to give to one another. This piece is only to say that I appreciate it, that it means more to me than many of you know. To the moderators of spaces like @blackampersand and @hey_blackgirl, to @_erynamelism, @dopegirlfresh, @thecityofjules, @Iwriteallday_, and more — your openness, your receptiveness, your kindness, and strength has helped me to heal. I am so grateful for you, for your sisterhood, your solidarity. Thank you.