The Unbundling of Media &amp; the Battle for Exclusive ContentIn November 2014, Taylor Swift, removed her music from the streaming service Spotify. Last week, Kanye West exploded on Twitter, among the rant he tweeted:These are just a couple examples of high profile artists limiting their content to specific distribution networks. Content exclusivity is not a new topic in media, however it has only recently begun to impact the digital music landscape. Post- Napster, it took time for artists to realize they were in charge of their content again and for technological enhancements to allow for simple distribution control. Throw in a few disgruntled reports of artists being paid fractions of pennies per play on music streaming services, and we are now in a market where content exclusivity in music is here to stay. This same battle for exclusivity is playing out across the media landscape and in my opinion the only person who loses is the consumer. Want access to “all” of today’s popular music? It will cost you $30+ per month for three different streaming services and that’s only considering the financial burden. There is also the negative user experience of having to manage different platforms and the downfalls of the Paradox of Choice.I understand the irony that 10 years ago artists would decide which distribution companies they worked with, how much their album was sold for etc. One may say that the industry has come back to their roots; record labels have been replaced by technology giants and artists are beginning to win-back the financial tug of war with the consumer. It’s a pay to play market and the consumer can’t ride the “free content” gravy train forever. If we want to listen to every famous artist, we have to pay for it. No different then in 1995 when consumers would pay $18 per album they wanted to hear. However, the consumer only has a certain amount of disposable income and more and more we are choosing the content we consume based on availability on the distribution channels we pay for. Personally, I only have a Spotify Premium Subscription, which impacts the artists and songs I listen to. Buy Tidal to listen to Kanye’s The Life of Pablo? I’ll pass, Pablo.Not only has media distribution been impacted, but now distribution platforms are actually financing content production. Drake is rumored to have an 8 figure (yes 8) deal with Apple. He premieres content on Apple Music, and now Peter Kafka of Re/Code has reported that Apple financed his latest music video for Hotline Bling. Music videos were previously financed by record companies, but now Apple, a technology &amp; distribution platform, has stepped into the role of music video producer.The battle for TV show exclusivity has also escalated. Ten years ago, HBO was the only real “pay to play” TV content creator with their own exclusive content. Now, technology focussed companies have entered the space including Netflix, Amazon &amp; Hulu, who are all fighting for attention of consumers and their disposable income. The same battle is occurring in movies as tech platforms are creating their own content and making it exclusive to their platform (ex. Beasts of No Nation on Netflix). Just like Kanye’s comment about his album distribution, Netflix has no intention to sell this movie or have it rented on any other platform. The only way you can watch it is with a Netflix subscription.So what is causing this monumental shift? The key (shout out DJ Khaled) is technology (no surprise here) and how distribution channels such as technology platforms have replaced traditional production companies &amp; networks. For tech companies, it’s a natural progression to enter content production &amp; management. They have spent hundreds of millions of dollars to acquire users and the network effects dictate a natural progression to further “owning” the consumer with exclusive content. For artists, the progession is more focussed on the ability to control their own brand identity and image without a middle man. Whether it’s the ability to market offerings through social media or use their own websites for distribution, artists have never been in more control.Let’s analyze the example of comedian Louis C.K. who recently released a new show that was only available on his website for $5. He wanted creative control and didn’t want to pay for distribution when he could do it himself. Louis e-mailed his fans telling them about the show and that they could exclusively buy it on his site. Fans were happy to directly support him and once the story was covered by a few media outlets / influencers, Mr. C.K. had a successful TV show launch solely on his website. What makes this feat even more impressive is Louis C.K. is not on social media. If an artist like Rihanna, with her 82 million Facebook fans, wanted to do the same? Piece of cake.So where do we go from here? I believe more artists will sign exclusive deals with tech companies or distribute their own content leading to a more fragmented market. Some will succeed, others will fail, but by using technology to cut out the middleman, profits to artists will rise. I also expect other media, such as books &amp; podcasts, to be impacted. Why wouldn’t Apple look at a successful podcasting company like Gimlet Media, acquire them and make their content exclusive to iOS users? The ultimate outcome is artists and distribution platforms are getting smarter on how to monetize &amp; control both content and users while consumers are being squeezed to determine what content we consume and at what cost.If you enjoyed this post I would appreciate if you recommend it by clicking the heart below! If you have thoughts on the shifting media landscape or want to discuss what the future of content exclusivity, leave a comment below or send me a message on Twitter Neel Lukka