1. The optimal length of a tweet2. The optimal length of a Facebook post3. The optimal length of a Google+ headline4. The optimal width of a paragraph5. The optimal length of a domain name6. The optimal length of a hashtag7. The optimal length of an email subject line8. The optimal length of an SEO title tag9. The optimal length of a blog headline10. The optimal length of a LinkedIn post11. The optimal length of a blogpost12. The optimal length of a YouTube video13. The optimal length of a podcast14. The optimal length of a presentation15. The optimal length of a SlideShare16. The optimal size of a Pinterest imageOver to you(If you enjoy the snazzy look and helpful info in this infographic, SumAll published a companion infographic — in a super cool, printable pdf format — over on their blog.For the free, print-ready infographic, visit the SumAll blog.What makes this length optimal? Tweets at this length get more retweets. They also have higher reply rate, retweet rate, and combined reply/retweet rate (these latter of which shows engagement per followers).Where’d this data come from? A pair of studies have found the 100-character mark to be the sweet spot for tweet length. Track Social studied 100 major brands (Oreo, Zappos, ESPN, etc.) for a 30-day period in the fall of 2012. Buddy Media studied 320 Twitter handles from major brands for two-and-a-half months at the beginning of 2012.What makes this length optimal? Posts at this length tend to receive higher like rate, comment rate, and combined like/comment rate (stats that include a comparison of total engagement to number of Facebook fans.)Where’d this data come from? A pair of studies have each found that shorter is better on Facebook. A Buddy Media study of the top 100 retailers Facebook pages during a six-month period in 2011 is one of the most-cited sources. Also in 2011, BlitzLocal studied 11,000 Facebook pages over a seven-month period.What makes this length optimal? It’s the maximum length for a Google+ headline to span one row before breaking to a second line.Where’d this data come from? Demian Farnworth of Copyblogger tested out the length with posts on the Copyblogger page. He found that bold headlines could reach 60 characters before additional words would be bumped to the second line.What makes this width optimal? At this width, the content appears simple to understand, and readers feel they can comprehend the subject matter.Where’d this data come from? Derek Halpern of Social Triggers synthesized a pair of research studies to arrive at the 40-to-55 character recommendation. The studies he cited include a 2004 meta-analysis by Mary C. Dyson of the University of Reading and a 1992 study from a team of Netherlands researchers.What makes this length optimal? This is the most common domain name length for the Internet’s most popular websites.Where’d this data come from? In 2009, Daily Blog Tips conducted an analysis of the top 250 websites in Alexa site rankings, counting words and characters that appeared in each domain name.What makes this length optimal? The 6-character hashtag recommendation comes from a handful of Twitter experts and is cited by Hashtags.org, one of the leading sites on the data and usage of hashtags.What makes this length optimal? You may see a slight uptick in open rate and click rate at this length.Where’d this data come from? A 2012 study by Mailer Mailer looked at 1.2 billion email messages to identify subject line trends.What makes this length optimal? Google search results tend to truncate titles with an ellipsis (…) if they go beyond the 55-character mark.Where’d this data come from? In March 2014, Moz analyzed 89,787 titles in search results pages.What makes this length optimal? Our eyes tend to pick up on the first three words of a headline and the last three words.Where’d this data come from? KISSmetrics author Bnonn cites usability research that confirms scanning of headlines. Also, Jakob Nielsen ran usability testing in 2009 based on the idea that readers typically consume only the first 11 characters of a headline.What makes this length optimal? The results in the Compendium study tend to focus on clickthroughs as the basis for recommending best practices. It’s safe to assume an ideal length of a LinkedIn post would be based on clicks, too.Where’d this data come from? In 2012, Compendium released its findings on a study of 200 companies on social media, looking at business-to-business and business-to-consumer best practices.What makes this length optimal? At this length, you can expect readers to spend the maximum amount of time reading your content. Total time on page is highest at the 1,600-word length than any other length.From the Medium study:Where’d this data come from? In December 2013, Medium published the results of its time on page analysis for blogposts on its network.What makes this length optimal? This is the average video length of the top videos on YouTube.Where’d this data come from? In 2012, ReelSEO counted the length of the top 50 YouTube videos and found the average duration to be 2 minutes, 54 seconds. Google researchers from the YouTube team confirmed the ideal length to be three minutes as well, according to an interview with Clinton Stark.What makes this length optimal? The 22-minute mark is when an average user disconnects from a podcast.Where’d this data come from? The data is reported from Stitcher, an online podcast streaming service.What makes this length optimal? This seems to be the upper limit for how long a person can pay attention before losing focus.Where’d this data come from? Author Carmine Gallo, who has written on the history of TED Talks, cites scientific research from Dr. Paul King of Texas Christian University as well as insight into how the brain processes new information (and expends energy while doing so).What makes this length optimal? Slide decks of this length get more views on average.Where’d this data come from? In 2010, HubSpot’s Dan Zarella shared results from his social media research, pointing to this optimal length.What makes this size optimal? At this size, you can expect more likes, repins, and comments.Where’d this data come from? In June, Curalate analyzed over 500,000 Pinterest images posted by brands. Their findings also included recommendations for faces, hue, texture, brightness, color, and more.We’d love to hear what you’ve found to be ideal lengths for the content in your marketing! Feel free to write a response to this article or leave any notes or highlights. It’d be an honor to hear from you!Originally published at blog.bufferapp.com.