All Social Media Is Showing OffImagine it's March. March of whichever year.You’re in Miami for the first time for Ultra, excited by all the beautiful people, the scenery, the nice cars. Everywhere you look, all you see is attractive people and shiny, coveted objects. So much so that you realize you’re only a few feet from millions and you’re probably as attractive as the last beautiful soul that walked past you.Now, regardless of how you feel about yourself, you automatically feel better considering your surroundings. Even if you don’t think you’re any better than those around you, at that moment in time and for the next several days and nights filled with neon lights, repetitive music and overpaid Djs, you’ll know that you’re better than the 1000+ “friends/followers” you have on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Tumblr, Pinterest, Quora, Medium, and you won’t hesitate to let them know with the bank of photos, videos and snaps you’ll be sending. It won’t matter if you are enjoying yourself or what’s happening in that EXACT moment because showing people what’s going on is much more important than being present in that moment.Or even understanding why it is that you feel the need to show them what’s going on. What you fail to understand, what you’ve never thought about understanding is why you do it. The pictures, videos, selfies and whatever else you use to increase your digital footprint, have no purpose. Beyond the superficial release of showing off or creating a “social” resume of the places you’ve been, events you’ve attended and famous people you’ve met, the world of internet media does little to nothing to enhance your life, or anyone else’s for that matter. It means nothing. The likes and comments validate the trouble you went through for an amazing shot of Kanye or the beautiful sunset you witnessed in San Clemente, or the $400 you dropped on a 3 lap test drive of a Gallardo. You’ve done it for so long you fail to realize that your denial is now on autopilot. Every post is just fluff. Every stupid video is a waste of 3 minutes you’ll never get back, and every picture is there to show the 1% of your life where you can smile for the camera the way you were taught as a kid. You’re creating an illusion of happiness when in reality, you’re as fucked up as the rest of us, but you’ve subscribed to the belief that it would be problematic to be honest and no one can know how mediocre your life actually is.So you join everyone in the one up contest; faking how amazing every day is to hide from your mundane reality. But if everyone’s doing the same thing in an attempt to be different, don’t we all end up being the same person in the process?I’m sure you’re wondering by now what the point is.The point is that I think some people get lucky. I think at one point you’ll be at that show and pull your phone out for a video or open Snapchat to capture that perfect sunrise and you’ll stop and think that it’s really not about them. It’s about you. It won’t matter who sees it or what they say, because at that point the moment will have already been gone for a few minutes, hours, or days and you’ll have missed it. You’ll realize that we all have a finite amount of those moments and those who realize this sooner and act on it end up being better off. I’m sure at this point this whole thing sounds like some “wake-up-live-in-the-moment-have-no-regrets-take-life-by-the-horns” pep talk, but it’s not. It’s meant to be a message that I hope you, you the person reading this, seriously you, whoever you are, understand that these websites, apps, programs were meant to disconnect us. They were meant to create competitions of bragging rights, of empty instances of our lives that we wish were more glamorous, and of the lives we wished we lived so much so that if we convince everyone that we are in fact living the lives of our dreams, it’ll be enough that we don’t personally have to pursue them, because then they’ll always be our dreams off in the future and not another thing we failed.I went to Huntington Beach last week, on a day where my 3 friends were all busy, because it felt like my heart was sinking lower and lower and there was no episode of Scrubs that could cheer me up. When I got there I pulled out my phone to take a picture and geotag it, thinking it would create envy and “buzz.” But all it did was bring me to this realization; all social media is showing off. For a brief moment it made me miss the flavor of my vanilla ice cream, it made me miss the fact that the world is huge regardless of how small we think it to be, and it made me miss the fact that it was a sunny day outside and a change of pace made me feel better. And it made me realize that every time I take a picture, I’m doing it for “them” instead of me. It doesn’t matter who they are because I know “they” doesn’t include “me.” And every time I stop and enjoy what’s happening, it’s for me.Feels as if you’re actually there, doesn't it?To stop my rambling all I’ll say is, I want to create my life outside of the internet. “Social” media is nothing more than a diluted way to live our lives. Whether it’s the guy everyone thinks is going to be super successful because he manages to take pictures with expensive cars or if it’s the girl that acts as if 30 guys hit on her daily because she’s the hottest thing ever, the truth is you’re all being fooled. Our purpose is not to simply exist or show off, it’s to create value for ourselves and those around us, and perpetuating a culture of jackassery and empty showmanship won’t do us any good.So the next time the scenery is amazing or something crazy is about to happen, just shut up, sit back, and enjoy it as it unfolds. Trust me, someone else will be filming it with their phone, and as they miss the important details, you’ll remember them vividly enough to tell the story, making the listeners feel as if they lived it too.